A pest is any organism harmful to humans or human concerns. The term is particularly used for creatures that damage crops, livestock, and forestry or cause a nuisance to people, especially in their homes. Humans have modified the environment for their own purposes and are intolerant of other creatures occupying the same space when their activities impact adversely on human objectives. Thus, an elephant is unobjectionable in its natural habitat but a pest when it tramples crops.
Some animals are disliked because they bite or sting; wolves, snakes, wasps, ants, bees, bed bugs, mosquitos, fleas and ticks belong in this category. Others enter the home; these include houseflies, which land on and contaminate food; beetles, which tunnel into the woodwork; and other animals that scuttle about on the floor at night, like rats, mice, and cockroaches, which are often associated with unsanitary conditions.
Agricultural and horticultural crops are attacked by a wide variety of pests, the most important being rodents, insects, mites, nematodes and gastropod molluscs. The damage they do results both from the direct injury they cause to the plants and from the indirect consequences of the fungal, bacterial or viral infections they transmit. Plants have their own defences against these attacks but these may be overwhelmed, especially in habitats where the plants are already stressed, or where the pests have been accidentally introduced and may have no natural enemies. The pests affecting trees are predominantly insects, and many of these have also been introduced inadvertently and lack natural enemies, and some have transmitted novel fungal diseases with devastating results.
Humans have traditionally performed pest control in agriculture and forestry by the use of pesticides; however, other methods exist such as mechanical control, and recently developed biological controls.
== Concept ==
A pest is any living thing which humans consider troublesome to themselves, their possessions, or the environment. Pests can cause issues with crops, human or animal health, buildings, and wild areas or larger landscapes. An older usage of the word "pest" is of a deadly epidemic disease, specifically plague. In its broadest sense, a pest is a competitor to humanity. Pests include plants, pathogens, invertebrates, vertebrates, or any organism that harms an ecosystem.
=== Animals ===
Animals are considered pests or vermin when they injure people or damage crops, forestry, or buildings. Elephants are regarded as pests by the farmers whose crops they raid and trample. Mosquitoes and ticks are vectors that can transmit ailments but are also pests because of the distress caused by their bites. Grasshoppers are usually solitary herbivores of little economic importance until the conditions are met for them to enter a swarming phase, become locusts and cause enormous damage. Many people appreciate birds in the countryside and their gardens, but when these accumulate in large masses, they can be a nuisance. Flocks of starlings can consist of hundreds of thousands of individual birds, their roosts can be noisy and their droppings voluminous; the droppings are acidic and can cause corrosion of metals, stonework, and brickwork as well as being unsightly. Pigeons in urban settings may be a health hazard, and gulls near the coast can become a nuisance, especially if they become bold enough to snatch food from passers-by. All birds are a risk at airfields where they can be sucked into aircraft engines. Woodpeckers sometimes excavate holes in buildings, fencing and utility poles, causing structural damage; they also drum on various reverberatory structures on buildings such as gutters, down-spouts, chimneys, vents and aluminium sheeting. Jellyfish can form vast swarms which may be responsible for damage to fishing gear, and sometimes clog the cooling systems of power and desalination plants which draw their water from the sea.
Many of the animals that we regard as pests live in our homes. Before humans built dwellings, these creatures lived in the wider environment, but co-evolved with humans, adapting to the warm, sheltered conditions that a house provides, the wooden timbers, the furnishings, the food supplies and the rubbish dumps. Many no longer exist as free-living organisms in the outside world, and can therefore be considered to be domesticated. The St Kilda house mouse rapidly became extinct when the last islander left the island of St Kilda, Scotland in 1930, but the St Kilda field mouse survived.
=== Plants ===
Plants may be considered pests, for example, if they are invasive species or weeds. There is no universal definition of what makes a plant a pest. Some governments, such as that of Western Australia, permit their authorities to prescribe as a pest plant "any plant that, in the local government authority's opinion, is likely to adversely affect the environment of the district, the value of property in the district, or the health, comfort or convenience of the district's inhabitants." An example of such a plant prescribed under this regulation is caltrop, Tribulus terrestris, which can cause poisoning in sheep and goats, but is mainly a nuisance around buildings, roadsides and recreation areas because of its uncomfortably sharp spiny burrs.
== Ecology ==
The term "plant pest", mainly applied to insect micropredators of plants, has a specific definition in terms of the International Plant Protection Convention and phytosanitary measures worldwide. A pest is any species, strain or biotype of plant, animal, or pathogenic agent injurious to plants or plant products.
Worldwide, agricultural pest impacts are increased by higher degrees of interconnectedness. This is due to the increased risk that any particular pest problem anywhere in the world (as a system) will propagate across the entire system.
=== Plant defences against pests ===
Plants have developed strategies that they use in their own defence, be they thorns (modified stems) or spines (modified leaves), stings, a thick cuticle or waxy deposits, with the second line of defence being toxic or distasteful secondary metabolites. Mechanical injury to the plant tissues allows the entry of pathogens and stimulates the plant to mobilise its chemical defences. The plant soon seals off the wound to reduce further damage.
Plants sometimes take active steps to reduce herbivory. Macaranga triloba for example has adapted its thin-walled stems to create ideal housing for an ant Crematogaster spp., which, in turn, protects the plant from herbivores. In addition to providing housing, the plant also provides the ant with its exclusive food source in the form of food bodies located on the leaf stipules. Similarly, several Acacia tree species have developed stout spines that are swollen at the base, forming a hollow structure that provides housing for ants which protect the plant. These Acacia trees also produce nectar in nectaries on their leaves as food for the ants.
=== Climate change ===
Pest ranges are heavily determined by climate. The most common example for the longest time has been rainfall: Although drought stress weakens crop disease resistance, drought also retards contagion and infection; and some variability in precipitation is universal. More recently climate change has been rapidly altering ranges, mostly by pushing them towards the poles (both North and South). From 1960–2013 ranges have shifted poleward by 2.7 ± 0.8 km (1.68 ± 0.50 mi) per year - albeit with significant differences between taxa. (Especially in the case of viruses and nematodes which show the opposite trend, toward the equator. This may be due to their lack of airborne dispersal, so their trend conforms with the trend of human-aided dispersal; or identification difficulties in the field.) In Europe, crop pests are expected to burgeon as the vertebrate predators which control them are expected to be suppressed by future climatic conditions.
== Economic impact ==
=== In agriculture and horticulture ===
Together pests and diseases cause up to 40% yield losses every year. The animal groups of the greatest importance as agricultural pests are (in order of economic importance) insects, mites, nematodes and gastropod molluscs.
Insects are responsible for two major forms of damage to crops. First, there is the direct injury they cause to the plants as they feed on the tissues; a reduction in leaf surface available for photosynthesis, distortion of growing shoots, a diminution of the plant's growth and vigour, and the wilting of shoots and branches caused by the insects' tunneling activities. Secondly there is the indirect damage, where the insects do little direct harm, but either transmit or allow entry of fungal, bacterial or viral infections. Although some insects are polyphagous, many are restricted to one specific crop, or group of crops. In many cases it is the larva that feeds on the plant, building up a nutritional store that will be used by the short-lived adult; sawfly and lepidopteran larvae feed mainly on the aerial portions of plants while beetle larvae tend to live underground, feeding on roots, or tunnel into the stem or under the bark. The true bugs, Hemiptera, have piercing and sucking mouthparts and live by sucking sap from plants. These include aphids, whiteflies and scale insects. Apart from weakening the plant, they encourage the growth of sooty mould on the honeydew the insects produce, which cuts out the light and reduces photosynthesis, stunting the plant's growth. They often transmit serious viral diseases between plants.
The mites that cause most trouble in the field are the spider mites. These are less than 1 mm (0.04 in) in diameter, can be very numerous, and thrive in hot, dry conditions. They mostly live on the underside of leaves and puncture the plant cells to feed, with some species forming webbing. They occur on nearly all important food crops and ornamental plants, both outdoors and under glass, and include some of the most economically important pests. Another important group of mites is the gall mites which affect a wide range of plants, several mite species being major pests causing substantial economic damage to crops. They can feed on the roots or the aerial parts of plants and transmit viruses. Some examples are the big bud mite that transmits the reversion virus of blackcurrants, the coconut mite which can devastate coconut production, and the cereal rust mite which transmits several grass and cereal viruses. Being exceedingly minute, many plant mites are spread by wind, although others use insects or other arthropods as a means to disperse.
The nematodes (eelworms) that attack plants are minute, often too small to be seen with the naked eye, but their presence is often apparent in the galls or "knots" they form in plant tissues. Vast numbers of nematodes are found in soil and attack roots, but others affect stems, buds, leaves, flowers and fruits. High infestations cause stunting, deformation and retardation of plant growth, and the nematodes can transmit viral diseases from one plant to another. When its populations are high, the potato cyst nematode can cause reductions of 80% in yield of susceptible potato varieties. The nematode eggs survive in the soil for many years, being stimulated to hatch by chemical cues produced by roots of susceptible plants.
Slugs and snails are terrestrial gastropod molluscs which typically chew leaves, stems, flowers, fruit and vegetable debris. Slugs and snails differ little from each other and both do considerable damage to plants. With novel crops being grown and with insect pests having been brought more under control by biological and other means, the damage done by molluscs becomes of greater significance. Terrestrial molluscs need moist environments; snails may be more noticeable because their shells provide protection from desiccation, while most slugs live in soil and only come out to feed at night. They devour seedlings, damage developing shoots and feed on salad crops and cabbages, and some species tunnel into potatoes and other tubers. One example being The giant apple snail, Pomacea maculata which causes billions in loss in rice production each year.
=== Weeds ===
A weed is a plant considered undesirable in a particular situation; the term has no botanical significance. Often, weeds are simply those native plants that are adapted to grow in disturbed ground, the disturbance caused by ploughing and cultivation favouring them over other species. Any plant is a weed if it appears in a location where it is unwanted; Bermuda grass makes a good lawn plant under hot dry conditions but become a bad weed when it out-competes cultivated plants.
A different group of weeds consists of those that are invasive, introduced, often unintentionally, to habitats to which they are not native but in which they thrive. Without their original competitors, herbivores, and diseases, they may increase and become a serious nuisance. One such plant is purple loosestrife, a native of Europe and Asia where it occurs in ditches, wet meadows and marshes; introduced into North America, it has no natural enemies to keep it in check and has taken over vast tracts of wetlands to the exclusion of native species.
=== In forestry ===
In forestry, pests may affect various parts of the tree, from its roots and trunk to the canopy far overhead. The accessibility of the part of the tree affected may make detection difficult, so that a pest problem may already be far advanced before it is first observed from the ground. The larch sawfly and spruce budworm are two insect pests prevalent in Alaska and aerial surveys can show which sections of forest are being defoliated in any given year so that appropriate remedial action can be taken.
Some pests may not be present on the tree all year round, either because of their life cycle or because they rotate between different host species at different times of the year. In forestry, pests may affect various parts of the tree, from its roots and trunk to the canopy far overhead. The larvae of wood-boring beetles, for example, are notorious for spending years excavating tunnels under the bark of trees, leading to significant structural damage. These larvae only emerge into the open for brief periods as adults, primarily to mate and disperse. The import and export of timber has inadvertently assisted some insect pests to establish themselves far from their country of origin. An insect may be of little importance in its native range, being kept under control by parasitoid wasps, predators, and the natural resistance of the host trees, but be a serious pest in a region into which it has been introduced. This is the case with the emerald ash borer, an insect native to north-eastern Asia, which, since its arrival in North America, has killed millions of ash trees.
=== In buildings ===
Animals able to live in the dry conditions found in buildings include many arthropods such as beetles, cockroaches, moths, mites, and silverfish. Another group, including termites, woodworm, longhorn beetles, and wood ants cause structural damage to buildings and furniture. The natural habitat of these is the decaying parts of trees. The deathwatch beetle infests the structural timbers of old buildings, mostly attacking hardwood, especially oak. The initial attack usually follows the entry of water into a building and the subsequent decay of damp timber. Furniture beetles mainly attack the sapwood of both hard and soft wood, only attacking the heartwood when it is modified by fungal decay. The presence of the beetles only becomes apparent when the larvae gnaw their way out, leaving small circular holes in the timber.
Carpet beetles and clothes moths cause non-structural damage to property such as clothing and carpets. It is the larvae that are destructive, feeding on wool, hair, fur, feathers and down. The moth larvae live where they feed, but the beetle larvae may hide behind skirting boards or in other similar locations between meals. They may be introduced to the home in any product containing animal fibres including upholstered furniture; the moths are feeble fliers but the carpet beetles may also enter houses through open windows. Furniture beetles, carpet beetles and clothes moths are also capable of creating great damage to museum exhibits, zoological and botanical collections, and other cultural heritage items. Constant vigilance is required to prevent an attack, and newly acquired items, and those that have been out on loan, may need quarantining before being added to the general collection.
There are over four thousand species of cockroach worldwide, but only four species are commonly regarded as pests, having adapted to live permanently in buildings. Considered to be a sign of unsanitary conditions, they feed on almost anything, reproduce rapidly and are difficult to eradicate. They can passively transport pathogenic microbes on their body surfaces, particularly in environments such as hospitals, and are linked with allergic reactions in humans.
Various insects attack dry food products, with flour beetles, the drugstore beetle, the sawtoothed grain beetle and the Indianmeal moth being found worldwide. The insects may be present in the warehouse or maybe introduced during shipping, in retail outlets, or in the home; they may enter packets through tiny cracks or may chew holes in the packaging. The longer a product is stored, the more likely it is to become contaminated, with the insects often originating from dry pet foods.
Some mites, too, infest foodstuffs and other stored products. Each substance has its own specific mite, and they multiply with great rapidity. One of the most damaging is the flour mite, which is found in grain and may become exceedingly abundant in poorly stored material. In time, predatory mites usually move in and control the flour mites.
== Countermeasures ==
=== Pest control in agriculture and horticulture ===
The control of pests in crops is as old as civilisation. The earliest approach was mechanical, from ploughing to picking off insects by hand. Early methods included the use of sulphur compounds, before 2500 BC in Sumeria. In ancient China, insecticides derived from plants were in use by 1200 BC to treat seeds and to fumigate plants. Chinese agronomy recognised biological control by natural enemies of pests and the varying of planting time to reduce pests before the first century AD. The agricultural revolution in Europe saw the introduction of effective plant-based insecticides such as pyrethrum, derris, quassia, and tobacco extract. The phylloxera (a powdery mildew) damage to the wine industry in the 19th century resulted in the development of resistant varieties and grafting, and the accidental discovery of effective chemical pesticides, Bordeaux mixture (lime and copper sulphate) and Paris Green (an arsenic compound), both very widely used. Biological control also became established as an effective measure in the second half of the 19th century, starting with the vedalia beetle against cottony cushion scale. All these methods have been refined and developed since their discovery.
=== Pest control in forestry ===
Forest pests inflict costly damage, but treating them is often unaffordable, given the relatively low value of forest products compared to agricultural crops. It is also generally impossible to eradicate forest pests, given the difficulty of examining entire trees, and the certainty that pesticides would damage many forest organisms other than the intended pests. Forest integrated pest management therefore aims to use a combination of prevention, cultural control measures, and direct control (such as pesticide use). Cultural measures include choosing appropriate species, keeping competing vegetation under control, ensuring a suitable stocking density, and minimizing injury and stress to trees.
=== Pest control in buildings ===
Pest control in buildings can be approached in several ways, depending on the type of pest and the area affected. Methods include improving sanitation and garbage control, modifying the habitat, and using repellents, growth regulators, traps, baits and pesticides. For example, the pesticide Boron can be impregnated into the fibres of cellulose insulation to kill self-grooming insects such as ants and cockroaches. Clothes moths can be controlled with airtight containers for storage, periodic laundering of garments, trapping, freezing, heating and the use of chemicals. Traditional mothballs deter adult moths with strong-smelling naphthalene; modern ones use volatile repellents such as 1,4-Dichlorobenzene. Moth larvae can be killed with insecticides such as permethrin or pyrethroids. However, insecticides cannot safely be used in food storage areas; alternative treatments include freezing foods for four days at 0 °F (−18 °C) or baking for half an hour at 130 °F (54 °C) to kill any insects present.
== In mythology, religion, folklore, and culture ==
Pests have attracted human attention from the birth of civilisation. Plagues of locusts caused devastation in the ancient Middle East, and were recorded in tombs in Ancient Egypt from as early as 2470 BC, and in the Book of Exodus in the Bible, as taking place in Egypt around 1446 BC. Homer's Iliad mentions locusts taking to the wing to escape fire. Given the impact of agricultural pests on human lives, people have prayed for deliverance. For example, the 10th century Greek monk Tryphon of Constantinople is said to have prayed "Snails, earwigs and all other creatures, hurt not the vines, nor the land nor the fruit of the trees, nor the vegetables ... but depart into the wild mountains."
The 11th-century Old English medical text Lacnunga contained charms and spells to ward off or treat pests such as wid smeogan wyrme, "penetrating worms", in this case requiring a charm to be sung, accompanied by covering the wound with spittle, pounded green centaury, and hot cow's urine.
The 20th century "prayer against pests" including the words "By Your power may these injurious animals be driven off so that they will do no harm to any one and will leave our fields and meadows unharmed" was printed in the 1956 Rural Life Prayerbook.
== References ==
== Further reading ==
Hockings, F. D. 2014,"Pests, Diseases and Beneficials", CSIRO Publishing, Melbourne, ISBN 9781486300211
Ordish, George (1976). The constant pest: a short history of pests and their control. P. Davies. ISBN 978-0-432-11300-4. OCLC 2276485.
== External links ==
Pests travel guide from Wikivoyage
UF/IFAS Pest Alert Web site Archived 2011-04-28 at the Wayback Machine - arthropods, nematodes and plant diseases affecting humans, livestock/pets, agricultural and ornamental plants.
Flying moisture insects
"Maps: FAO in Emergencies". UN FAO. Archived from the original on 2022-12-02. Retrieved 2021-07-22.
Common Garden Pests: Identification, Life Cycles, and Natural Control

Maize (; Zea mays), also known as corn, is a tall stout grass that produces cereal grain. The leafy stalk of the plant gives rise to male inflorescences or tassels which produce pollen, and female inflorescences called ears. The ears yield grain, known as kernels or seeds. In modern commercial varieties, these are usually yellow or white; other varieties can be of many colors. Maize was domesticated by indigenous peoples in southern Mexico about 9,000 years ago from wild teosinte. Native Americans planted it alongside beans and squashes in the Three Sisters polyculture. That is, those three vegetables were the main staple crops of the time.
Maize relies on humans for its propagation. Since the Columbian exchange, it has become a staple food in many parts of the world, with the total production of maize surpassing that of wheat and rice. Much maize is used for animal feed, whether as grain (fodder) or as the whole plant, which can either be baled as forage or made into the more palatable silage. Sugar-rich varieties called sweet corn are grown for human consumption, while field corn varieties are used for animal feed, for uses such as cornmeal or masa, corn starch, corn syrup, pressing into corn oil, alcoholic beverages like bourbon whiskey, and as chemical feedstocks including ethanol and other biofuels.
Maize is cultivated throughout the world; a greater weight of maize is produced each year than any other grain. In 2020, world production was 1.1 billion tonnes. It is afflicted by many pests and diseases; two major insect pests, European corn borer and corn rootworms, have each caused annual losses of a billion dollars in the United States. Modern plant breeding has greatly increased output and qualities such as nutrition, drought tolerance, and tolerance of pests and diseases. Much maize is now genetically modified.
As a food, maize is used to make a wide variety of dishes including Mexican tortillas and tamales, Italian polenta, and American hominy grits. Maize protein is low in some essential amino acids, and the niacin it contains only becomes available if freed by alkali treatment. In pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, maize was deified as a maize god and depicted in sculptures.
== Description ==
Maize is a tall annual grass with a single stem, ranging in height from 1.2 to 4 m (4 to 13 ft). The long narrow leaves arise from the nodes or joints, alternately on opposite sides on the stalk. Maize is monoecious, with separate male and female flowers on the same plant. At the top of the stem is the tassel, an inflorescence of male flowers; their anthers release pollen, which is dispersed by wind. The female inflorescence, some way down the stem from the tassel, is first seen as a silk, a bundle of soft tubular hairs, one for the carpel in each female flower, which develops into a kernel (often called a seed. Botanically, as in all grasses, it is a fruit, fused with the seed coat to form a caryopsis) when it is pollinated. A whole female inflorescence develops into an ear or corncob, enveloped by multiple leafy layers or husks. The ear leaf is the leaf most closely associated with a particular developing ear. This leaf and those above it contribute over three quarters of the carbohydrate (starch) that fills the grain.
The grains are usually yellow or white in modern varieties; other varieties have orange, red, brown, blue, purple, or black grains. They are arranged in 8 to 32 rows around the cob; there can be up to 1200 grains on a large cob. Yellow maizes derive their color from carotenoids; red maizes are colored by anthocyanins and phlobaphenes; and orange and green varieties may contain combinations of these pigments.
Maize has short-day photoperiodism, meaning that it requires nights of a certain length to flower. Flowering further requires enough warm days above 10 °C (50 °F). The control of flowering is set genetically; the physiological mechanism involves the phytochrome system. Tropical cultivars can be problematic if grown in higher latitudes, as the longer days can make the plants grow tall instead of setting seed before winter comes. On the other hand, growing tall rapidly could be convenient for producing biofuel.
Immature maize shoots accumulate a powerful antibiotic substance, 2,4-dihydroxy-7-methoxy-1,4-benzoxazin-3-one (DIMBOA), which provides a measure of protection against a wide range of pests. Because of its shallow roots, maize is susceptible to droughts, intolerant of nutrient-deficient soils, and prone to being uprooted by severe winds.
The pollen is an allergen, but most of it falls within a few meters of the tassel and the risk is largely restricted to farm workers.
== Genetics ==
Maize is diploid with 20 chromosomes. 83% of allelic variation within the genome derives from its teosinte ancestors, primarily due to the freedom of Zea species to outcross. Barbara McClintock used maize to validate her transposon theory of "jumping genes", for which she won the 1983 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Maize remains an important model organism for genetics and developmental biology. The MADS-box motif is involved in the development of maize flowers.
The Maize Genetics and Genomics Database is funded by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) to support maize research. The International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center maintains a large collection of maize accessions tested and cataloged for insect resistance. In 2005, the U.S. National Science Foundation, the USDA, and the Department of Energy formed a consortium to sequence the maize genome. The resulting DNA sequence data was deposited immediately into GenBank, a public repository for genome-sequence data. Sequencing of the maize genome was completed in 2008. In 2009, the consortium published results of its sequencing effort. The genome, 85% of which is composed of transposons, contains 32,540 genes. Much of it has been duplicated and reshuffled by helitrons, a group of transposable elements within maize's DNA.
== Taxonomy ==
The maize genus Zea is relatively closely related to sorghum, both being in the PACMAD clade of Old World grasses, and much more distantly to rice and wheat, which are in the other major group of grasses, the BOP clade. It is closely related to Tripsacum, gamagrass.
=== Maize and teosinte ===
Maize is the domesticated variant of the four species of teosintes, which are its crop wild relatives. Teosinte was likely used by hunter-gatherers because it added security to their food supply, being that it was adaptable to changes in climate and environment.
The teosinte origin theory was proposed by the Russian botanist Nikolai Ivanovich Vavilov in 1931, and the American Nobel Prize-winner George Beadle in 1932. The two plants have dissimilar appearance, maize having a single tall stalk with multiple leaves and teosinte being a short, bushy plant. The difference between the two is largely controlled by differences in just two genes, called grassy tillers-1 (gt1, A0A317YEZ1) and teosinte branched-1 (tb1, Q93WI2). In the late 1930s, Paul Mangelsdorf suggested that domesticated maize was the result of a hybridization event between an unknown wild maize and a species of Tripsacum, a related genus; this has been refuted by modern genetic testing.
In 2004, John Doebley identified Balsas teosinte, Zea mays subsp. parviglumis, native to the Balsas River valley in Mexico's southwestern highlands, as the crop wild relative genetically most similar to modern maize. The middle part of the short Balsas River valley is the likely location of early domestication. Stone milling tools with maize residue have been found in an 8,700 year old layer of deposits in a cave not far from Iguala, Guerrero. Doebley and colleagues showed in 2002 that maize had been domesticated only once, about 9,000 years ago, and then spread throughout the Americas.
Maize pollen dated to 7,300 years ago from San Andres, Tabasco has been found on the Caribbean coast. A primitive corn was being grown in southern Mexico, Central America, and northern South America 7,000 years ago. Archaeological remains of early maize ears, found at Guila Naquitz Cave in the Oaxaca Valley, are roughly 6,250 years old; the oldest ears from caves near Tehuacan, Puebla, are 5,450 years old.
=== Spreading to the north ===
Around 4,500 years ago, maize began to spread to the north. Maize was first cultivated at several sites in New Mexico and Arizona about 4,100 years ago. During the first millennium AD, maize cultivation spread more widely in the areas north. In particular, the large-scale adoption of maize agriculture and consumption in eastern North America took place about A.D. 900. Native Americans cleared large forest and grassland areas for the new crop. The rise in maize cultivation 500 to 1,000 years ago in what is now the southeastern U.S. corresponded with a decline of freshwater mussels, which are very sensitive to environmental changes.
=== Names ===
The name maize derives from the Spanish form maíz of the Taíno mahis. The Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus used the common name maize as the species epithet in Zea mays. The name maize is preferred in formal, scientific, and international usage as a common name because it refers specifically to this one grain, unlike corn, which has a complex variety of meanings that vary by context and geographic region. Most countries primarily use the term maize, and the name corn is used mainly in the U.S. and a handful of other English-speaking countries. In countries that primarily use the term maize, the word corn may denote any cereal crop, varying geographically with the local staple, such as wheat in England and oats in Scotland or Ireland. The usage of corn for maize started as a shortening of "Indian corn" in 18th-century North America.
The historian of food Betty Fussell writes in an article on the history of the word corn in North America that "[t]o say the word corn is to plunge into the tragi-farcical mistranslations of language and history". Similar to the British usage, the Spanish referred to maize as panizo, a generic term for cereal grains, as did Italians with the term polenta. The British later referred to maize as Turkey wheat, Turkey corn, or Indian corn; Fussell comments that "they meant not a place but a condition, a savage rather than a civilized grain".
International groups such as the Centre for Agriculture and Bioscience International consider maize the preferred common name. The word maize is used by the UN's Food and Agriculture Organization, and in the names of the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center of Mexico, the Indian Institute of Maize Research, the Maize Association of Australia, the National Maize Association of Nigeria, the National Maize Association of Ghana, the Maize Trust of South Africa, and the Zimbabwe Seed Maize Association.
== Cultivation ==
=== Pre-Columbian development ===
Maize requires human intervention for its propagation. The kernels of its naturally-propagating teosinte ancestor fall off the cob on their own, while those of domesticated maize do not. All maize arose from a single domestication in southern Mexico about 9,000 years ago. The oldest surviving maize types are those of the Mexican highlands. Maize spread from this region to the lowlands and over the Americas along two major paths. The centre of domestication was most likely the Balsas River valley of south-central Mexico. Maize reached highland Ecuador at least 8000 years ago. It reached lower Central America by 7,600 years ago, and the valleys of the Colombian Andes between 7,000 and 6,000 years ago.
The earliest maize plants grew a single, small ear per plant. The Olmec and Maya cultivated maize in numerous varieties throughout Mesoamerica; they cooked, ground and processed it through nixtamalization. By 3000 years ago, maize was central to Olmec culture, including their calendar, language, and myths.
The Mapuche people of south-central Chile cultivated maize along with quinoa and potatoes in pre-Hispanic times. Before the expansion of the Inca Empire, maize was traded and transported as far south as 40° S in Melinquina, Lácar Department, Argentina, probably brought across the Andes from Chile.
=== Columbian exchange ===
After the arrival of Europeans in 1492, Spanish settlers consumed maize, and explorers and traders carried it back to Europe. Spanish settlers much preferred wheat bread to maize. Maize flour could not be substituted for wheat for communion bread, since in Christian belief at that time only wheat could undergo transubstantiation and be transformed into the body of Christ.
Maize spread to the rest of the world because of its ability to grow in diverse climates. It was cultivated in Spain just a few decades after Columbus's voyages and then spread to Italy, West Africa, the Philippines and elsewhere. By the 17th century, it was a common peasant food in Southern Europe. By the 18th century, it was the chief food of the southern French and Italian peasantry, especially as polenta in Italy.
When maize was introduced into Western farming systems, it was welcomed for its productivity. However, a widespread problem of malnutrition soon arose wherever it had become a staple food. Indigenous Americans had learned to soak maize in alkali-water – made with ashes and lime – since at least 1200–1500 BC, creating the process of nixtamalization. They did this to liberate the corn hulls, but coincidentally it also liberated the B-vitamin niacin, the lack of which caused pellagra. Once alkali processing and dietary variety were understood and applied, pellagra disappeared in the developed world. The development of high-lysine maize and the promotion of a more balanced diet have contributed to its demise. Pellagra still exists in food-poor areas and refugee camps where people survive on donated maize.
=== Conventional breeding ===
Maize breeding in prehistory resulted in large plants producing large ears. Modern breeding began with individuals who selected highly productive varieties in their fields and then sold seed to other farmers. James L. Reid was one of the earliest and most successful, developing Reid's Yellow Dent in the 1860s. These early efforts were based on mass selection (a row of plants is grown from seeds of one parent), and the choosing of plants after pollination (which means that only the female parents are known). Later breeding efforts included ear to row selection (C. G. Hopkins c. 1896), hybrids made from selected inbred lines (G. H. Shull, 1909), and the highly successful double cross hybrids using four inbred lines (D. F. Jones c. 1918, 1922). University-supported breeding programs were especially important in developing and introducing modern hybrids.
Since the 1940s, the best strains of maize have been first-generation hybrids made from inbred strains that have been optimized for specific traits, such as yield, nutrition, drought, pest and disease tolerance. Both conventional cross-breeding and genetic engineering have succeeded in increasing output and reducing the need for cropland, pesticides, water and fertilizer. There is conflicting evidence to support the hypothesis that maize yield potential has increased over the past few decades. This suggests that changes in yield potential are associated with leaf angle, lodging resistance, tolerance of high plant density, disease/pest tolerance, and other agronomic traits rather than increase of yield potential per individual plant.
Certain varieties of maize have been bred to produce many ears; these are the source of the "baby corn" used as a vegetable in Asian cuisine. A fast-flowering variety named mini-maize was developed to aid scientific research, as multiple generations can be obtained in a single year. One strain called olotón has evolved a symbiotic relationship with nitrogen-fixing microbes, which provides the plant with 29%–82% of its nitrogen. The International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT) operates a conventional breeding program to provide optimized strains. The program began in the 1980s. Hybrid seeds are distributed in Africa by its Drought Tolerant Maize for Africa project.
Tropical landraces remain an important and underused source of resistance alleles – both those for disease and for herbivores. Such alleles can then be introgressed into productive varieties. Rare alleles for this purpose were discovered by Dao and Sood, both in 2014. In 2018, Zerka Rashid of CIMMYT used its association mapping panel, developed for tropical drought tolerance traits. to find new genomic regions providing sorghum downy mildew resistance, and to further characterize known differentially methylated regions.
Genetically modified maize was one of the 26 genetically engineered food crops grown commercially in 2016. The vast majority of this is Bt maize. Genetically modified maize has been grown since 1997 in the United States and Canada; by 2016, 92% of the U.S. maize crop was genetically modified. As of 2011, herbicide-tolerant maize and insect-resistant maize varieties were each grown in over 20 countries.
In September 2000, up to $50 million worth of food products were recalled due to the presence of Starlink genetically modified corn, which had been approved only for animal consumption.
=== Growing ===
Because it is cold-intolerant, in the temperate zones maize must be planted in the spring. Its root system is generally shallow, so the plant is dependent on soil moisture. As a plant that uses C4 carbon fixation, maize is a considerably more water-efficient crop than plants that use C3 carbon fixation such as alfalfa and soybeans. Maize is most sensitive to drought at the time of silk emergence, when the flowers are ready for pollination. In the United States, a good harvest was traditionally predicted if the maize was "knee-high by the Fourth of July", although modern hybrids generally exceed this growth rate. Maize used for silage is harvested while the plant is green and the fruit immature. Sweet corn is harvested in the "milk stage", after pollination but before starch has formed, between late summer and early to mid-autumn. Field maize is left in the field until very late in the autumn to thoroughly dry the grain, and may, in fact, sometimes not be harvested until winter or even early spring. The importance of sufficient soil moisture is shown in many parts of Africa, where periodic drought regularly causes maize crop failure and consequent famine. Although it is grown mainly in wet, hot climates, it can thrive in cold, hot, dry or wet conditions, meaning that it is an extremely versatile crop.
Maize was planted by the Native Americans in small hills of soil, in the polyculture system called the Three Sisters. Maize provided support for beans; the beans provided nitrogen derived from nitrogen-fixing rhizobia bacteria which live on the roots of beans and other legumes; and squashes provided ground cover to stop weeds and inhibit evaporation by providing shade over the soil.
=== Harvesting ===
Sweet corn, harvested earlier than maize grown for grain, grows to maturity in a period of from 60 to 100 days according to variety. An extended sweet corn harvest, picked at the milk stage, can be arranged either by planting a selection of varieties that ripen earlier and later, or by planting different areas at fortnightly intervals.
Maize harvested as a grain crop can be kept in the field a relatively long time, even months, after the crop is ready to harvest; it can be harvested and stored in the husk leaves if kept dry.
According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, in the four decades from 1855 to 1894 the amount of labor required to produce one bushel of maize declined from four hours and thirty four minutes to only forty-one minutes. Before 1940, most maize in North America was harvested by hand. This involved a large number of workers and associated social events (husking or shucking bees). From the 1850s onward, some machinery became available to partially mechanize the processes, such as one- and two-row mechanical pickers (picking the ear, leaving the stover) and corn binders, which are reaper-binders designed specifically for maize. The latter produce sheaves that can be shocked. By hand or mechanical picker, the entire ear is harvested, which requires a separate operation of a maize sheller to remove the kernels from the ear. Whole ears of maize were often stored in corn cribs, sufficient for some livestock feeding uses. Today corn cribs with whole ears, and corn binders, are less common because most modern farms harvest the grain from the field with a combine harvester and store it in bins. The combine with a corn head (with points and snap rolls instead of a reel) does not cut the stalk; it simply pulls the stalk down. The stalk continues downward and is crumpled into a mangled pile on the ground, where it usually is left to become organic matter for the soil. The ear of maize is too large to pass between slots in a plate as the snap rolls pull the stalk away, leaving only the ear and husk to enter the machinery. The combine separates the husk and the cob, keeping only the kernels.
=== Grain storage ===
Drying is vital to prevent or at least reduce damage by mould fungi, which contaminate the grain with mycotoxins. Aspergillus and Fusarium spp. are the most common mycotoxin sources, and accordingly important in agriculture. If the moisture content of the harvested grain is too high, grain dryers are used to reduce the moisture content by blowing heated air through the grain. This can require large amounts of energy in the form of combustible gases (propane or natural gas) and electricity to power the blowers.
=== Production ===
Maize is widely cultivated throughout the world, and a greater weight of maize is produced each year than any other grain. In 2020, total world production was 1.16 billion tonnes, led by the U.S. with 31.0% of the total (table). China produced 22.4% of the global total.
=== Pests ===
Many pests can affect maize growth and development, including invertebrates, weeds, and pathogens.
Maize is susceptible to a large number of fungal, bacterial, and viral plant diseases. Those of economic importance include diseases of the leaf, smuts such as corn smut, ear rots and stalk rots. Northern corn leaf blight damages maize throughout its range, whereas banded leaf and sheath blight is a problem in Asia. Some fungal diseases of maize produce potentially dangerous mycotoxins such as aflatoxin. In the United States, major diseases include tar spot, bacterial leaf streak, gray leaf spot, northern corn leaf blight, and Goss's wilt; in 2022, the most damaging disease was tar spot, which caused losses of 116.8 million bushels.
Maize sustains a billion dollars' worth of losses annually in the U.S. from each of two major insect pests, namely the European corn borer or ECB (Ostrinia nubilalis) and corn rootworms (Diabrotica spp) western corn rootworm, northern corn rootworm, and southern corn rootworm. Another serious pest is the fall armyworm (Spodoptera frugiperda).
The maize weevil (Sitophilus zeamais) is a serious pest of stored grain. The Northern armyworm, Oriental armyworm or Rice ear-cutting caterpillar (Mythimna separata) is a major pest of maize in Asia.
Nematodes too are pests of maize. It is likely that every maize plant harbors some nematode parasites, and populations of Pratylenchus lesion nematodes in the roots can be "enormous". The effects on the plants include stunting, sometimes of whole fields, sometimes in patches, especially when there is also water stress and poor control of weeds.
Many plants, both monocots (grasses) such as Echinochloa crus-galli (barnyard grass) and dicots (forbs) such as Chenopodium and Amaranthus may compete with maize and reduce crop yields. Control may involve mechanical weed removal, flame weeding, or herbicides.
== Uses ==
=== Culinary ===
Maize and cornmeal (ground dried maize) constitute a staple food in many regions of the world. Maize is used to produce the food ingredient cornstarch. Maize starch can be hydrolyzed and enzymatically treated to produce high fructose corn syrup, a sweetener. Maize may be fermented and distilled to produce Bourbon whiskey. Corn oil is extracted from the germ of the grain.
In prehistoric times, Mesoamerican women used a metate quern to grind maize into cornmeal. Nursing mothers also used maize as a weaning gruel for their children.
After ceramic vessels were invented the Olmec people began to cook maize together with beans, improving the nutritional value of the staple meal. Although maize naturally contains niacin, an important nutrient, it is not bioavailable without the process of nixtamalization. The Maya used nixtamal meal to make porridges and tamales.
Maize is a staple of Mexican cuisine. Masa (nixtamal) is the main ingredient for tortillas, atole and many other dishes of Central American food. It is the main ingredient of corn tortilla, tamales, atole and the dishes based on these.
The corn smut fungus, known as huitlacoche, which grows on maize, is a Mexican delicacy.
Coarse maize meal is made into a thick porridge in many cultures: from the polenta of Italy, the angu of Brazil, the mămăligă of Romania, to cornmeal mush in the U.S. (or hominy grits in the Southern U.S.) or the food called mieliepap in South Africa and sadza, nshima, ugali and other names in other parts of Africa. Introduced into Africa by the Portuguese in the 16th century, maize has become Africa's most important staple food crop.
Sweet corn, a genetic variety that is high in sugars and low in starch, is eaten in the unripe state as corn on the cob.
=== Nutritional value ===
Raw, yellow, sweet maize kernels are composed of 76% water, 19% carbohydrates, 3% protein, and 1% fat. In a 100-gram serving, maize kernels provide 86 calories and are a good source (10–19% of the Daily Value) of the B vitamins, thiamin, niacin (if freed), pantothenic acid (B5) and folate. Maize has suboptimal amounts of the essential amino acids tryptophan and lysine, which accounts for its lower status as a protein source. The proteins of beans and legumes complement those of maize.
=== Animal feed ===
Maize is a major source of animal feed. In the United States, feed is around 40% of total domestic maize use, and around 64% including exports of corn silage and dried distiller grains (ethanol coproducts). As a grain crop, the dried kernels are used as feed. They are often kept on the cob for storage in a corn crib, or they may be shelled off for storage in a grain bin. When the grain is used for feed, the rest of the plant (the corn stover) can be used later as fodder, bedding (litter), or soil conditioner. When the whole plant (grain plus stalks and leaves) is used for fodder, it is usually chopped and made into silage, as this is more digestible and more palatable to ruminants than the dried form. Traditionally, maize was gathered into shocks after harvesting, where it dried further. It could then be stored for months until fed to livestock. Silage can be made in silos or in silage wrappers. In the tropics, maize is harvested year-round and fed as green forage to the animals. Baled cornstalks offer an alternative to hay for animal feed, alongside direct grazing of maize grown for this purpose.
=== Chemicals ===
Starch from maize can be made into plastics, fabrics, adhesives, and many other chemical products. Corn steep liquor, a plentiful watery byproduct of maize wet milling process, is used in the biochemical industry and research as a culture medium to grow microorganisms.
=== Biofuel ===
Feed maize is being used for heating; specialized corn stoves (similar to wood stoves) use either feed maize or wood pellets to generate heat. Maize cobs can be used as a biomass fuel source. Home-heating furnaces which use maize kernels as a fuel have a large hopper that feeds the kernels into the fire. Maize is used as a feedstock for the production of ethanol fuel. The price of food is indirectly affected by the use of maize for biofuel production: such use increases the demand, and therefore the price of maize. A pioneering biomass gasification power plant in Strem, Burgenland, Austria, started operating in 2005. It would be possible to create diesel from the biogas by the Fischer Tropsch method.
== In human culture ==
In Mesoamerica, maize is seen as a vital force, deified as a maize god, usually female. In the U.S., maize ears are carved into column capitals in the U.S. Capitol building. The Corn Palace in Mitchell, South Dakota, uses cobs and ears of colored maize to implement a mural design that is recycled annually. The concrete Field of Corn sculpture in Dublin, Ohio depicts hundreds of ears of corn in a grassy field. A maize stalk with two ripe ears is depicted on the reverse of the Croatian 1 lipa coin, minted since 1993.
Maize kernels have sometimes denoted cowardice, as maize is fed to chickens, which symbolise cowards. In the months before the 1973 Chilean coup d'etat anti-Allende protestors threw maize at military barracks in a call to depose him.
== See also ==
Blue corn – Variety of maize
Dent corn – Variety of corn
Detasseling – Removing male flowers from corn plants
Flint corn – Variety of maize
Glass gem corn – Variety of maize
Post-harvest losses (grains) – Ways in which grain losses can occur and ways of addressing problems
Purple corn – Variety of flint maize
Push–pull technology – Pest control strategy for maize and sorghum
Zein – Proteins found in maize (corn)
== References ==
== Further reading ==
Byerlee, Derek. "The globalization of hybrid maize, 1921–70." Journal of Global History 15.1 (2020): 101–122.
Clampitt, Cynthia. Maize: How Corn Shaped the U.S. Heartland (2015)
Bonavia, Duccio (May 13, 2013). Maize: Origin, Domestication, and Its Role in the Development of Culture. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-02303-1.
== External links ==
Maize Genetics and Genomics Database
Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock Center
"Zea mays". Germplasm Resources Information Network. Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture.

Vegetables are edible parts of plants that are consumed by humans or other animals as food. This original meaning is still commonly used, and is applied to plants collectively to refer to all edible plant matter, including flowers, fruits, stems, leaves, roots, and seeds. An alternative definition is applied somewhat arbitrarily, often by culinary and cultural tradition; it may include savoury fruits such as tomatoes and squash, flowers such as broccoli, and seeds such as pulses, but exclude foods derived from some plants that are fruits, flowers, nuts, and cereal grains.
Originally, vegetables were collected from the wild by hunter-gatherers and entered cultivation in several parts of the world, probably during the period 10,000 BC to 7,000 BC, when a new agricultural way of life developed. At first, plants that grew locally were cultivated, but as time went on, trade brought common and exotic crops from elsewhere to add to domestic types. Nowadays, most vegetables are grown all over the world as climate permits, and crops may be cultivated in protected environments in less suitable locations. China is the largest producer of vegetables, and global trade in agricultural products allows consumers to purchase vegetables grown in faraway countries. The scale of production varies from subsistence farmers supplying the needs of their family for food, to agribusinesses with vast acreages of single-product crops. Depending on the type of vegetable concerned, harvesting the crop is followed by grading, storing, processing, and marketing.
Vegetables can be eaten either raw or cooked and play an important role in human nutrition, being mostly low in fat and carbohydrates, but high in vitamins, minerals and dietary fiber. Many nutritionists encourage people to consume plenty of fruit and vegetables, five or more portions a day often being recommended.
== Etymology ==
The word vegetable was first recorded in English in the early 15th century. It comes from Old French, and was originally applied to all plants; the word is still used in this sense in biological contexts. It derives from Medieval Latin vegetabilis "growing, flourishing" (i.e. of a plant), a semantic change from a Late Latin meaning "to be enlivening, quickening".
The meaning of "vegetable" as a "plant grown for food" was not established until the 18th century. In 1767, the word was specifically used to mean a "plant cultivated for food, an edible herb or root". The year 1955 saw the first use of the shortened, slang term "veggie".
As an adjective, the word vegetable is used in scientific and technical contexts with a different and much broader meaning, namely of "related to plants" in general, edible or not—as in vegetable matter, vegetable kingdom, vegetable origin, etc.
== Terminology ==
The exact definition of "vegetable" may vary simply because of the many parts of a plant consumed as food worldwide—roots, stems, leaves, flowers, fruits, and seeds. The broadest definition is the word's use adjectivally to mean "matter of plant origin". More specifically, a vegetable may be defined as "any plant, part of which is used for food", a secondary meaning then being "the edible part of such a plant". A more precise definition is "any plant part consumed for food that is not a fruit or seed, but including mature fruits that are eaten as part of a main meal". Falling outside these definitions are edible fungi (such as edible mushrooms) and edible seaweed which, although not parts of plants, are often treated as vegetables.
In the latter-mentioned definition of "vegetable", which is used in everyday language, the words "fruit" and "vegetable" are sometimes seen as mutually exclusive. "Fruit" has a precise botanical meaning, being a part that developed from the ovary of a flowering plant. This is considerably different from the word's culinary meaning. While peaches, plums, and oranges are "fruit" in both senses, many items that are vegetables in the common definition, such as eggplants, bell peppers, and tomatoes, are botanically fruits.
The question of whether the tomato is a fruit or a vegetable found its way into the United States Supreme Court in 1893. The court ruled unanimously in Nix v. Hedden that a tomato is correctly identified as, and thus taxed as, a vegetable, for the purposes of the Tariff of 1883 on imported produce. However, the court acknowledged that, botanically speaking, a tomato is a fruit.
== History ==
Before the advent of agriculture, humans were hunter-gatherers. They foraged for edible fruit, nuts, stems, leaves, corms, and tubers and hunted animals for food. Forest gardening in a tropical jungle clearing is thought to be the first example of agriculture; useful plant species were identified and encouraged to grow while undesirable species were removed. Plant breeding through the selection of strains with desirable traits such as large fruit and vigorous growth soon followed. While the first evidence for the domestication of grasses such as wheat and barley has been found in the Fertile Crescent in the Middle East, it is likely that various peoples around the world started growing crops in the period 10,000 BC to 7,000 BC. Subsistence agriculture continues to this day, with many rural farmers in Africa, Asia, South America, and elsewhere using their plots of land to produce enough food for their families, while any surplus produce is used for exchange for other goods.
Throughout recorded history, the rich have been able to afford a varied diet including meat, vegetables and fruit, but for poor people, meat was a luxury and the food they ate was very dull, typically comprising mainly some staple product made from rice, rye, barley, wheat, millet or maize. The addition of vegetable matter provided some variety to the diet. The staple diet of the Aztecs in Central America was maize and they cultivated tomatoes, avocados, beans, peppers, pumpkins, squashes, peanuts, and amaranth seeds to supplement their tortillas and porridge. In Peru, the Incas subsisted on maize in the lowlands and potatoes at higher altitudes. They also used seeds from quinoa, supplementing their diet with peppers, tomatoes, and avocados.
In ancient China, rice was the staple crop in the south and wheat in the north, the latter made into dumplings, noodles, and pancakes. Vegetables used to accompany these included yams, soybeans, broad beans, turnips, spring onions, and garlic. The diet of the ancient Egyptians was based on bread, often contaminated with sand which wore away their teeth. Meat was a luxury but fish was more plentiful. These were accompanied by a range of vegetables including marrows, broad beans, lentils, onions, leeks, garlic, radishes, and lettuces.
The mainstay of the ancient Greek diet was bread, and this was accompanied by goat's cheese, olives, figs, fish, and occasionally meat. The vegetables grown included onions, garlic, cabbages, melons, and lentils. In ancient Rome, a thick porridge was made of emmer wheat or beans, accompanied by green vegetables but little meat, and fish was not esteemed. The Romans grew broad beans, peas, onions and turnips and ate the leaves of beets rather than their roots.
== Some common vegetables ==
== Nutrition and health ==
Vegetables play an important role in human nutrition. Most are low in fat and calories but are bulky and filling. They supply dietary fiber and are important sources of essential vitamins, minerals, and trace elements. Particularly important are the antioxidant vitamins A, C, and E. When vegetables are included in the diet, there is found to be a reduction in the incidence of cancer, stroke, cardiovascular disease, and other chronic ailments. Research has shown that, compared with individuals who eat less than three servings of fruits and vegetables each day, those that eat more than five servings have an approximately twenty percent lower risk of developing coronary heart disease or stroke.
The nutritional content of vegetables varies considerably; some contain useful amounts of protein though generally they contain little fat, and varying proportions of vitamins such as vitamin A, vitamin K, and vitamin B6; provitamins; dietary minerals; and carbohydrates.
The consumption of crunchy and hard to chew foods, such as raw vegetables, during youth, while the bones are still growing, is needed for the human's, and other animals', jaws' proper development, and without their consumption, the jaws do not grow to their full size, thus not leaving enough room for the teeth to grow in correctly, causing crooked and impacted teeth.
However, vegetables often also contain toxins and antinutrients which interfere with the absorption of nutrients. These include α-solanine, α-chaconine, enzyme inhibitors (of cholinesterase, protease, amylase, etc.), cyanide and cyanide precursors, oxalic acid, tannins and others. These toxins are natural defenses, used to ward off the insects, predators and fungi that might attack the plant. Some beans contain phytohaemagglutinin, and cassava roots contain cyanogenic glycoside as do bamboo shoots. These toxins can be deactivated by adequate cooking. Green potatoes contain glycoalkaloids and should be avoided.
Fruit and vegetables, particularly leafy vegetables, have been implicated in nearly half the gastrointestinal infections caused by norovirus in the United States. These foods are commonly eaten raw and may become contaminated during their preparation by an infected food handler. Hygiene is important when handling foods to be eaten raw, and such products need to be properly cleaned, handled, and stored to limit contamination.
=== Recommendations ===
The USDA Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends consuming five to nine servings of fruit and vegetables daily. The total amount consumed will vary according to age and gender, and is determined based upon the standard portion sizes typically consumed, as well as general nutritional content. Potatoes are not included in the count as they are mainly providers of starch. For most vegetables and vegetable juices, one serving is half of a cup and can be eaten raw or cooked. For leafy greens, such as lettuce and spinach, a single serving is typically a full cup. A variety of products should be chosen as no single fruit or vegetable provides all the nutrients needed for health.
International dietary guidelines are similar to the ones established by the USDA. Japan, for example, recommends the consumption of five to six servings of vegetables daily. French recommendations provide similar guidelines and set the daily goal at five servings. In India, the daily recommendation for adults is 275 grams (9.7 oz) of vegetables per day.
== Production ==
=== Cultivation ===
Vegetables have been part of the human diet from time immemorial. Some are staple foods but most are accessory foodstuffs, adding variety to meals with their unique flavors and at the same time, adding nutrients necessary for health. Some vegetables are perennials but most are annuals and biennials, usually harvested within a year of sowing or planting. Whatever system is used for growing crops, cultivation follows a similar pattern; preparation of the soil by loosening it, removing or burying weeds, and adding organic manures or fertilisers; sowing seeds or planting young plants; tending the crop while it grows to reduce weed competition, control pests, and provide sufficient water; harvesting the crop when it is ready; sorting, storing, and marketing the crop or eating it fresh from the ground.
Different soil types suit different crops, but in general in temperate climates, sandy soils dry out fast but warm up quickly in the spring and are suitable for early crops, while heavy clays retain moisture better and are more suitable for late season crops. The growing season can be lengthened by the use of fleece, cloches, plastic mulch, polytunnels, and greenhouses. In hotter regions, the production of vegetables is constrained by the climate, especially the pattern of rainfall, while in temperate zones, it is constrained by the temperature and day length.
On a domestic scale, the spade, fork, and hoe are the tools of choice while on commercial farms a range of mechanical equipment is available. Besides tractors, these include ploughs, harrows, drills, transplanters, cultivators, irrigation equipment, and harvesters. New techniques are changing the cultivation procedures involved in growing vegetables with computer monitoring systems, GPS locators, and self-steer programs for driverless machines giving economic benefits.
=== Harvesting ===
When a vegetable is harvested, it is cut off from its source of water and nourishment. It continues to transpire and loses moisture as it does so, a process most noticeable in the wilting of green leafy crops. Harvesting root vegetables when they are fully mature improves their storage life, but alternatively, these root crops can be left in the ground and harvested over an extended period. The harvesting process should seek to minimise damage and bruising to the crop. Onions and garlic can be dried for a few days in the field and root crops such as potatoes benefit from a short maturation period in warm, moist surroundings, during which time wounds heal and the skin thickens up and hardens. Before marketing or storage, grading needs to be done to remove damaged goods and select produce according to its quality, size, ripeness, and color.
=== Storage ===
All vegetables benefit from proper post harvest care. A large proportion of vegetables and perishable foods are lost after harvest during the storage period. These losses may be as high as thirty to fifty percent in developing countries where adequate cold storage facilities are not available. The main causes of loss include spoilage caused by moisture, moulds, micro-organisms, and vermin.
Storage can be short-term or long-term. Most vegetables are perishable and short-term storage for a few days provides flexibility in marketing. During storage, leafy vegetables lose moisture, and the vitamin C in them degrades rapidly. A few products such as potatoes and onions have better keeping qualities and can be sold when higher prices may be available, and by extending the marketing season, a greater total volume of crop can be sold. If refrigerated storage is not available, the priority for most crops is to store high-quality produce, to maintain a high humidity level, and to keep the produce in the shade.
Proper post-harvest storage aimed at extending and ensuring shelf life is best effected by efficient cold chain application. Cold storage is particularly useful for vegetables such as cauliflower, eggplant, lettuce, radish, spinach, potatoes, and tomatoes, the optimum temperature depending on the type of produce. There are temperature-controlling technologies that do not require the use of electricity such as evaporative cooling. Storage of fruit and vegetables in controlled atmospheres with high levels of carbon dioxide or high oxygen levels can inhibit microbial growth and extend storage life.
The irradiation of vegetables and other agricultural produce by ionizing radiation can be used to preserve it from both microbial infection and insect damage, as well as from physical deterioration. It can extend the storage life of food without noticeably changing its properties.
=== Preservation ===
The objective of preserving vegetables is to extend their availability for consumption or marketing purposes. The aim is to harvest the food at its maximum state of palatability and nutritional value, and preserve these qualities for an extended period. The main causes of deterioration in vegetables after they are gathered are the actions of naturally occurring enzymes and the spoilage caused by micro-organisms. Canning and freezing are the most commonly used techniques, and vegetables preserved by these methods are generally similar in nutritional value to comparable fresh products with regards to carotenoids, vitamin E, minerals. and dietary fiber.
Canning is a process during which the enzymes in vegetables are deactivated and the micro-organisms present killed by heat. The sealed can excludes air from the foodstuff to prevent subsequent deterioration. The lowest necessary heat and the minimum processing time are used in order to prevent the mechanical breakdown of the product and to preserve the flavor as far as is possible. The can is then able to be stored at ambient temperatures for a long period.
Freezing vegetables and maintaining their temperature at below −10 °C (14 °F) will prevent their spoilage for a short period, whereas a temperature of −18 °C (0 °F) is required for longer-term storage. The enzyme action will merely be inhibited, and blanching of suitably sized prepared vegetables before freezing mitigates this and prevents off-flavors developing. Not all micro-organisms will be killed at these temperatures and after thawing the vegetables should be used promptly because otherwise, any microbes present may proliferate.
Traditionally, sun drying has been used for some products such as tomatoes, mushrooms, and beans, spreading the produce on racks and turning the crop at intervals. This method suffers from several disadvantages including lack of control over drying rates, spoilage when drying is slow, contamination by dirt, wetting by rain, and attack by rodents, birds, and insects. These disadvantages can be alleviated by using solar powered driers. The dried produce must be prevented from reabsorbing moisture during storage.
High levels of both sugar and salt can preserve food by preventing micro-organisms from growing. Green beans can be salted by layering the pods with salt, but this method of preservation is unsuited to most vegetables. Marrows, beetroot, carrot, and some other vegetables can be boiled with sugar to create jams. Vinegar is widely used in food preservation; a sufficient concentration of acetic acid prevents the development of destructive micro-organisms, a fact made use of in the preparation of pickles, chutneys and relishes. Fermentation is another method of preserving vegetables for later use. Sauerkraut is made from chopped cabbage and relies on lactic acid bacteria which produce compounds that are inhibitory to the growth of other micro-organisms.
=== Top producers ===
In 2010, China was the largest vegetable producing nation, with over half the world's production. India, the United States, Turkey, Iran, and Egypt were the next largest producers. China had the highest area of land devoted to vegetable production, while the highest average yields were obtained in Spain and the Republic of Korea.
== Standards ==
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) sets international standards to ensure that products and services are safe, reliable, and of good quality. There are a number of ISO standards regarding fruits and vegetables. ISO 1991-1:1982 lists the botanical names of sixty-one species of plants used as vegetables along with the common names of the vegetables in English, French, and Russian. ISO 67.080.20 covers the storage and transport of vegetables and their derived products.
== See also ==
List of vegetable dishes
List of vegetables
Market gardening
Perennial vegetable
Post-harvest losses (vegetables)
Vegetable carving
Plant Resources of Tropical Africa
World Vegetable Center
== References ==
== External links ==
"Vegetable" . Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

Soil salinity is the salt content in the soil; the process of increasing the salt content is known as salinization (also called salination in American English). Salts occur naturally within soils and water. Salinization can be caused by natural processes such as mineral weathering or by the gradual withdrawal of an ocean. It can also come about through artificial processes such as irrigation and road salt.
== Natural occurrence ==
Salts are a natural component in soils and water bodies. The ions responsible for salinization are: Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+ and Cl−.
Over long periods of time, as soil minerals weather and release salts, these salts are flushed or leached out of the soil by drainage water in areas with sufficient precipitation or under irrigation, or may rise through capillarity and accumulate near the surface under intense evaporation during drought periods. In addition to mineral weathering, salts are also deposited via dust and precipitation. Salts may accumulate in dry regions, leading to naturally saline soils. This is the case, for example, in large parts of Australia.
Human practices can increase the salinity of soils by the addition of salts in irrigation water. Proper irrigation management can prevent salt accumulation by providing adequate drainage water (e.g. rainwater) to leach added salts from the soil. Disrupting drainage patterns that provide leaching can also result in salt accumulations. An example of this occurred in Egypt in 1970 when the Aswan High Dam was built. The change in the level of ground water before the construction had enabled soil erosion, which led to high concentration of salts in the water table. After the construction, the continuous high level of the water table led to the salinization of arable land. The increase in aridity caused by human-induced global warming also contributes to the salinization of waterlogged soils.
== Sodic soils ==
When the Na+ (sodium) predominates, soils can become sodic. The pH of sodic soils may be acidic, neutral, or alkaline.
Sodic soils present particular challenges because they tend to have very poor structure which limits or prevents water infiltration and drainage. They tend to accumulate certain elements like boron and molybdenum in the root zone at levels that may be toxic for plants. The most common compound used for reclamation of sodic soil is gypsum, and some organisms that are tolerant to salt and ion toxicity (e.g. halophytes, halophilic rhizobacteria) may offer strategies for improvement.
The term "sodic soil" is sometimes used imprecisely in scholarship. It's been used interchangeably with the term alkali soil, which is used for soil with a pH greater than 8.2, an exchangeable sodium content above 15% of cation-exchange capacity, or both.
== Dry land salinity ==
Salinity in drylands can occur when the water table is between two and three metres from the surface for clayey soils but for sandy soils it may be less than a metre. The salts from the groundwater are raised by capillary action to the surface of the soil. This occurs when groundwater is saline (which is true in many areas), and is favored by land use practices allowing more rainwater to enter the aquifer than it could accommodate. For example, the clearing of trees for agriculture is a major reason for dryland salinity in some areas, since deep rooting of trees has been replaced by shallow rooting of annual crops.
== Salinity due to irrigation ==
Salinity from irrigation can occur over time wherever irrigation occurs, since almost all water (even natural rainfall) contains some dissolved salts. When the plants use the water, the salts are left behind in the root zone (rhizosphere) and eventually begin to accumulate. This water in excess of plant needs is called the leaching fraction. Salinization from irrigation water is also greatly increased by poor drainage and use of saline water for irrigating agricultural crops.
Salinity in urban areas often results from the combination of irrigation, now common in gardens and recreation areas, often using salt-laden reclaimed water, and groundwater processes.
== Consequences of soil salinity ==
The consequences of salinity are
Detrimental effects on plant growth and yield
Damage to infrastructure (roads, bricks, corrosion of pipes and cables)
Reduction of water quality for users, sedimentation problems, increased leaching of metals, especially copper, cadmium, manganese and zinc
Soil erosion ultimately, when crops are too strongly affected by the amounts of salts and the vegetation cover collapses
More energy required to desalinate
Salinity is an important land degradation problem. Soil salinity can be reduced by leaching soluble salts out of soil with excess irrigation water of good quality (i.e. poor in salts). Soil salinity control involves watertable control and flushing in combination with tile drainage or another form of subsurface drainage. A comprehensive treatment of soil salinity is available from the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization.
The presence of soluble salts in soils can significantly influence their engineering properties, particularly under varying moisture conditions. Studies have shown that long-term soaking can lead to dissolution and redistribution of salts in clayey and gypsiferous soils, resulting in changes in soil structure and a reduction in strength and stiffness.
Research on gypsiferous soils has further demonstrated that moisture variation and soaking conditions can significantly affect mechanical performance due to gypsum dissolution and changes in internal soil structure.
Earlier studies have also shown that compaction conditions interact with salinity effects, where increased compaction improves initial strength, but long-term exposure to moisture may still result in degradation due to dissolution of soluble salts in gypsiferous soils.
== Salt tolerance of crops ==
High levels of soil salinity can be tolerated if salt-tolerant plants are grown. Sensitive crops lose their vigor already in slightly saline soils, most crops are negatively affected by (moderately) saline soils, and only salinity-resistant crops thrive in severely saline soils. The University of Wyoming, the Utah State University, and the Government of Alberta report data on the salt tolerance of crop plants.
Field data in irrigated lands, under farmers' conditions, are scarce, especially in developing countries. However, some on-farm surveys have been made in Egypt, India, and Pakistan. Some examples are shown in the following gallery, with crops arranged from sensitive to very tolerant.
Calcium has been found to have a positive effect in combating salinity in soils. It has been shown to ameliorate the negative effects that salinity has such as reduced water uptake by plants.
Soil salinity activates genes associated with stress conditions for plants. These genes initiate the production of plant stress enzymes such as superoxide dismutase, L-ascorbate oxidase, and Delta 1 DNA polymerase. Limiting this process can be achieved by administering exogenous glutamine to plants. The decrease in the level of expression of genes responsible for the synthesis of superoxide dismutase increases with the increase in glutamine concentration.
== Regions affected ==
From the FAO/UNESCO Soil Map of the World the following salinised areas can be derived.
== See also ==
Alkali soil – Soil type with pH > 8.5
Arabidopsis thaliana responses to salinity
Biosaline agriculture – Production of crops in salt-rich conditions
Biosalinity – Use of salty water for irrigation
Crop tolerance to seawater – Quality in crops
Desalination – Removal of salts from water
Environmental impacts of deicing salt – Chemicals used to de-ice surfacesPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Halophyte – Salt-tolerant plant
Halotolerance – Adaptation of living organisms to conditions of high salinity
Salinity in Australia
Salt tolerance of crops
Sodium in biology
Water softening – Removing positive ions from hard water
U.S. Salinity Laboratory – National Laboratory for research on salt-affected soil
== References ==
== External links ==
Article on water and salt balances in the soil
Download leaching model for saline soils
Salt of the Earth Documentary produced by Prairie Public Television

Barley (Hordeum vulgare), a member of the grass family, is a major cereal grain grown in temperate climates globally. One of the first cultivated grains, it was domesticated in the Fertile Crescent around 9000 BC, giving it nonshattering spikelets and making it much easier to harvest. Its use then spread throughout Eurasia by 2000 BC. Barley prefers relatively low temperatures and well-drained soil to grow. It is relatively tolerant of drought and soil salinity, but is less winter-hardy than wheat or rye.
In 2023, barley was fourth among grains in quantity produced, 146 million tonnes, behind maize, rice, and wheat. Globally, 70% of barley production is used as animal feed, while 30% is used as a source of fermentable material for beer, or further distilled into whisky, and as a component of various foods. It is used in soups and stews and in barley bread of various cultures. Barley grains are commonly made into malt using a traditional and ancient method of preparation. In English folklore, John Barleycorn personifies the grain and the alcoholic beverages made from it. English pub names such as The Barley Mow allude to its role in the production of beer.
== Etymology ==
The Old English word for barley was bere. This survives in the north of Scotland as bere; it is used for a strain of six-row barley grown there. Modern English barley derives from the Old English adjective bærlic, meaning "of barley". The word barn derives from Old English bere-aern meaning "barley-store".
The name of the genus is from Latin hordeum, barley, likely related to Latin horrere, to bristle.
== Description ==
Barley is a cereal, a member of the grass family with edible grains. Its flowers are clusters of spikelets arranged in a distinctive herringbone pattern. Each spikelet has a long thin awn (to 160 mm (6.3 in) long), making the ears look tufted. The spikelets are in clusters of three. In six-row barley, all three spikelets in each cluster are fertile; in two-row barley, only the central one is fertile. It is a self-pollinating, diploid species with 14 chromosomes.
The genome of barley was sequenced in 2012 by the International Barley Genome Sequencing Consortium and the UK Barley Sequencing Consortium. The genome is organised into seven pairs of nuclear chromosomes (recommended designations: 1H, 2H, 3H, 4H, 5H, 6H and 7H), and one mitochondrial and one chloroplast chromosome, with a total of 5000 Mbp. Details of the genome are freely available in several barley databases.
== Origin ==
=== External phylogeny ===
The barley genus Hordeum is relatively closely related to wheat and rye within the Triticeae, and more distantly to rice within the BOP clade of grasses (Poaceae). The phylogeny of the Triticeae is complicated by hybridization between species, so there is a network of relationships rather than a simple inheritance-based tree.
=== Domestication ===
Barley was one of the first grains to be domesticated in the Fertile Crescent, an area of relatively abundant water in Western Asia, around 9,000 BC. Wild barley (H. vulgare ssp. spontaneum) ranges from North Africa and Crete in the west to Tibet in the east. A study of genome-wide diversity markers found Tibet to be an additional center of domestication of cultivated barley. The earliest archaeological evidence of the consumption of wild barley, Hordeum spontaneum, comes from the Epipaleolithic at Ohalo II at the southern end of the Sea of Galilee, where grinding stones with traces of starch were found. The remains were dated to about 23,000 BC. The earliest evidence for the domestication of barley, in the form of cultivars that cannot reproduce without human assistance, comes from Mesopotamia, specifically the Jarmo region of modern-day Iraq, around 9,000–7,000 BC.
Domestication changed the morphology of the barley grain substantially, from an elongated shape to a more rounded spherical one. Wild barley has distinctive genes, alleles, and regulators with potential for resistance to abiotic or biotic stresses; these may help cultivated barley to adapt to climatic changes. Wild barley has a brittle spike; upon maturity, the spikelets separate, facilitating seed dispersal. Domesticated barley has nonshattering spikelets, making it much easier to harvest the mature ears. The nonshattering condition is caused by a mutation in one of two tightly linked genes known as Bt1 and Bt2; many cultivars possess both mutations. The nonshattering condition is recessive, so varieties of barley that exhibit this condition are homozygous for the mutant allele. Domestication in barley is followed by the change of key phenotypic traits at the genetic level.
The wild barley found currently in the Fertile Crescent may not be the progenitor of the barley cultivated in Eritrea and Ethiopia, indicating that it may have been domesticated separately in eastern Africa.
=== Spread ===
Archaeobotanical evidence shows that barley had spread throughout Eurasia by 2,000 BC. Genetic analysis demonstrates that cultivated barley followed several different routes over time. By 4200 BC domesticated barley had reached Eastern Finland. Barley has been grown in the Korean Peninsula since the Early Mumun Pottery Period (circa 1500–850 BC). Barley (Yava in Sanskrit) is mentioned many times in the Rigveda and other Indian scriptures as a principal grain in ancient India. Traces of barley cultivation have been found in post-Neolithic Bronze Age Harappan civilization 5,700–3,300 years ago. Barley beer was probably one of the first alcoholic drinks developed by Neolithic humans; later it was used as currency. The Sumerian language had a word for barley, akiti. In ancient Mesopotamia, a stalk of barley was the primary symbol of the goddess Shala.
Rations of barley for workers appear in Linear B tablets in Mycenaean contexts at Knossos and at Mycenaean Pylos. In mainland Greece, the ritual significance of barley possibly dates back to the earliest stages of the Eleusinian Mysteries. The preparatory kykeon or mixed drink of the initiates, prepared from barley and herbs, mentioned in the Homeric hymn to Demeter. The goddess's name may have meant "barley-mother", incorporating the ancient Cretan word δηαί (dēai), "barley". The practice was to dry the barley groats and roast them before preparing the porridge, according to Pliny the Elder's Natural History. Tibetan barley has been a staple food in Tibetan cuisine since the fifth century AD. This grain, along with a cool climate that permitted storage, produced a civilization that was able to raise great armies. It is made into a flour product called tsampa that is still a staple in Tibet. In medieval Europe, bread made from barley and rye was peasant food, while wheat products were consumed by the upper classes.
== Taxonomy and varieties ==
=== Two-row and six-row barley ===
Spikelets are arranged in triplets which alternate along the rachis. In wild barley (and other Old World species of Hordeum), only the central spikelet is fertile, while the other two are reduced. This condition is retained in certain cultivars known as two-row barleys. A pair of mutations (one dominant, the other recessive) result in fertile lateral spikelets to produce six-row barleys. A mutation in one gene, vrs1, is responsible for the transition from two-row to six-row barley. Brewers in Europe tend to use two-row cultivars and breweries in North America use six-row barley (or a mix), and there are important differences in enzyme content, kernel shape, and other factors that malters and brewers must take into consideration.
In traditional taxonomy, different forms of barley were classified as different species based on morphological differences. Two-row barley with shattering spikes (wild barley) was named Hordeum spontaneum. Two-row barley with nonshattering spikes was named as H. distichon, six-row barley with nonshattering spikes as H. vulgare (or H. hexastichum), and six-row with shattering spikes as H. agriocrithon. Because these differences were driven by single-gene mutations, coupled with cytological and molecular evidence, most recent classifications treat these forms as a single species, H. vulgare.
=== Hulless barley ===
Hulless or "naked" barley (Hordeum vulgare var. nudum) is a form of domesticated barley with an easier-to-remove hull. Naked barley is an ancient food crop, but a new industry has developed around uses of selected hulless barley to increase the digestibility of the grain, especially for pigs and poultry. Hulless barley has been investigated for several potential new applications as whole grain, bran, and flour. Hulless barley can offer higher protein, increased beta-glucan content, and more efficient handling and processing because of the lack of hull.
== Production ==
In 2024, world production of barley was 142 million tonnes, led by Russia with 12% of the total (table). Australia, Germany, and France were secondary producers.
Worldwide barley production in 2023 was fourth among grains, following maize (1.2 billion tonnes), rice (800 million tonnes), and wheat (799 million tonnes).
== Cultivation ==
Barley is a crop that prefers relatively low temperatures, 15 to 20 °C (59 to 68 °F) in the growing season; it is grown around the world in temperate areas. It grows best in well-drained soil in full sunshine. In the tropics and subtropics, it is grown for food and straw in South Asia, North and East Africa, and in the Andes of South America. In dry regions it requires irrigation. It has a short growing season and is relatively drought-tolerant. Barley is more tolerant of soil salinity than other cereals, varying in different cultivars. It has less winter-hardiness than winter wheat and far less than rye.
Like other cereals, barley is typically planted on tilled land. Seed was traditionally scattered, but in developed countries is usually drilled. As it grows it requires soil nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium), often supplied as fertilizers. It needs to be monitored for pests and diseases, and if necessary treated before these become serious. The stems and ears turn yellow when ripe, and the ears begin to droop. Traditional harvesting was by hand with sickles or scythes; in developed countries, harvesting is mechanised with combine harvesters.
== Pests and diseases ==
Among the insect pests of barley are aphids such as Russian wheat aphid, caterpillars such as of the armyworm moth, barley mealybug, and wireworm larvae of click beetle genera such as Aeolus. Aphid damage can often be tolerated, whereas armyworms can eat whole leaves. Wireworms kill seedlings, and require seed or preplanting treatment.
Serious fungal diseases of barley include powdery mildew caused by Blumeria hordei, leaf scald caused by Rhynchosporium secalis, barley rust caused by Puccinia hordei, crown rust caused by Puccinia coronata, various diseases caused by Cochliobolus sativus, Fusarium ear blight,
and stem rust (Puccinia graminis).
Bacterial diseases of barley include bacterial blight caused by Xanthomonas campestris pv. translucens.
Barley is susceptible to several viral diseases, such as barley mild mosaic bymovirus. Some viruses, such as barley yellow dwarf virus, vectored by the rice root aphid, can cause serious crop injury.
For durable disease resistance, quantitative resistance is more important than qualitative resistance. The most important foliar diseases have corresponding resistance gene regions on all chromosomes of barley.
A large number of molecular markers are available for breeding of resistance to leaf rust, powdery mildew, Rhynchosporium secalis, Pyrenophora teres f. teres, Barley yellow dwarf virus, and the Barley yellow mosaic virus complex.
== Food ==
=== Preparation ===
Hulled barley (or covered barley) is eaten after removing the inedible, fibrous, outer husk or hull. Once removed, it is called dehulled barley (or pot barley or scotch barley). Pearl barley (or pearled barley) is dehulled to remove most of the bran, and polished. Barley meal, a wholemeal barley flour lighter than wheat meal but darker in colour, is used in gruel. This gruel is known as سويق : sawīq in the Arab world.
With a long history of cultivation in the Middle East, barley is used in a wide range of traditional Arabic, Assyrian, Israelite, Kurdish, and Persian foodstuffs including keşkek, kashk, and murri. Barley soup is traditionally eaten during Ramadan in Saudi Arabia. Cholent or hamin (in Hebrew) is a traditional Jewish stew often eaten on the Sabbath, in numerous recipes by both Mizrahi and Ashkenazi Jews; its original form was a barley porridge.
In Eastern and Central Europe, barley is used in soups and stews such as ričet. In Africa, where it is a traditional food plant, it has the potential to improve nutrition, boost food security, foster rural development, and support sustainable landcare.
The six-row variety bere is cultivated in Orkney, Shetland, Caithness and the Western Isles of the Scottish Highlands and Islands. When milled into beremeal, it is used locally in bread, biscuits, and the traditional beremeal bannock.
In Japanese cuisine, barley is mixed with rice and steamed as mugimeshi. The naval surgeon Takaki Kanehiro introduced it into institutional cooking to combat beriberi, endemic in the armed forces in the 19th century. It became standard prison fare, and remains a staple in the Japan Self-Defense Forces.
In Korean cuisine, a similar dish called boribap (보리밥) has been eaten since the Joseon dynasty. In Jeju Island, unripe barley rice was eaten in spring when food was short. Barley rice, hard to cook and linked to poverty, had lower status than white rice. In the 1960s and 1970s, schoolchildren's lunchboxes had to contain barley rice. Barley rice has become a nostalgic food for older people, served in specialty restaurants.
=== Nutrition ===
Cooked barley is 69% water, 28% carbohydrates, 2% protein, and 0.4% fat (table). In a 100-gram (3.5 oz) reference serving, cooked barley provides 515 kilojoules (123 kcal) of food energy and is a good source (10% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of essential nutrients, including, dietary fibre, the B vitamin niacin (14% DV), and dietary minerals, including iron (10% DV) and manganese (12% DV) (table).
=== Health implications ===
According to Health Canada and the US Food and Drug Administration, consuming at least 3 grams per day of barley beta-glucan can lower levels of blood cholesterol, a risk factor for cardiovascular diseases.
Eating whole-grain barley, a high-fibre grain, improves regulation of blood sugar (i.e., reduces blood glucose response to a meal). Consuming breakfast cereals containing barley over weeks to months improves cholesterol levels and glucose regulation.
Barley contains gluten, which makes it an unsuitable grain for consumption by people with gluten-related disorders, such as coeliac disease, non-coeliac gluten sensitivity and wheat allergy sufferers. Nevertheless, some wheat allergy patients can tolerate barley.
== Uses ==
=== Beer, whisky, and soft drinks ===
Barley, made into malt, is a key ingredient in beer and whisky production. Two-row barley is traditionally used in German and English beers. Six-row barley was traditionally used in US beers, but both varieties are in common usage now. Distilled from green beer, Scottish and Irish whisky are made primarily from barley. About 25% of American barley is used for malting, for which barley is the best-suited grain. Accordingly, barley is often assessed by its malting enzyme content. Barley wine is a style of strong beer from the English brewing tradition. An 18th-century alcoholic drink of the same name was made by boiling barley in water, then mixing the barley water with white wine, borage, lemon and sugar. In the 19th century, a different barley wine was prepared from recipes of ancient Greek origin.
Nonalcoholic drinks such as barley water and roasted barley tea have been made by boiling barley in water. In Italy, roasted barley is sometimes used as coffee substitute, caffè d'orzo (barley coffee).
=== Animal feed ===
Some 70% of the world's barley production is used as livestock feed, for example for cattle feeding in western Canada. In 2014, an enzymatic process was devised to make a high-protein fish feed from barley, suitable for carnivorous fish such as trout and salmon.
=== Cover crops ===
When sown in the autumn and terminated and tilled into the soil in spring, barley cover crops significantly reduced early-season weed density and time required for hand-hoeing in southern New Mexico chile pepper systems. The weed-suppressive effect of barley was demonstrated in a subsequent ex situ study, in which Palmer amaranth seeds demonstrated slowed germination when incubated with barley-amended soil compared to unamended soil. The inability of barley to support oviposition of the beet leafhopper, an insect known to vector Beet Curly Top Virus to more than 300 species of plants, further poses it as a potential method of integrated pest management in chile pepper.
=== Other uses ===
Barley straw has been placed in mesh bags and floated in fish ponds or water gardens to help prevent algal growth without harming pond plants and animals. The technique's effectiveness is at best mixed.
Barley grains were once used for measurement in England, there being nominally three or four barleycorns to the inch. By the 19th century, this had been superseded by standard inch measures. In ancient Mesopotamia, barley was used as a form of money, the standard unit of weight for barley, and hence of value, being the shekel. Barley water was used in medieval times as a remedy, as mentioned by Avicenna.
== Culture and folklore ==
In the Old English poem Beowulf, and in Norse mythology, Scyld Scefing (the second name meaning "with a sheaf") and his son Beow ("Barley") are associated with the grain, or are possibly corn-gods; J. R. R. Tolkien wrote a poem "King Sheave" about them, and based a major element of his legendarium, the Old Straight Road from Middle-earth to the earthly paradise of Valinor, on their story. William of Malmesbury's 12th century Chronicle tells the story of the related figure Sceafa as a sleeping child in a boat without oars with a sheaf of corn at his head. Axel Olrik identified Peko, a parallel "barley-figure" in Finnish culture, in turn connected by R.D. Fulk with the Eddaic Bergelmir.
In English folklore, the figure of John Barleycorn in the folksong of the same name is a personification of barley, and of the beer made from it. In the song, John Barleycorn is represented as suffering attacks, death, and indignities that correspond to the various stages of barley cultivation, such as reaping and malting; but he is revenged by getting the men drunk: "And little Sir John and the nut-brown bowl / Proved the strongest man at last." The folksong "Elsie Marley" celebrates an alewife of County Durham with lines such as "And do you ken Elsie Marley, honey? / The wife that sells the barley, honey". The antiquary Cuthbert Sharp records that Elsie Marley was "a handsome, buxom, bustling landlady, and brought good custom to the [ale] house by her civility and attention."
English pub names such as The Barley Mow, John Barleycorn, Malt Shovel, and Mash Tun allude to barley's role in the production of beer.
== References ==
=== Sources ===
== External links ==
Barley at the Wikibooks Cookbook subproject

Agriculture is the practice of cultivating the soil, planting, raising, and harvesting both food and non-food crops, as well as livestock production. Broader definitions also include forestry and aquaculture. Agriculture was a key factor in the rise of sedentary human civilization, whereby farming of domesticated plants and animals created food surpluses that enabled people to live in the cities. While humans started gathering grains at least 105,000 years ago, nascent farmers only began planting them around 11,500 years ago. Sheep, goats, pigs, and cattle were domesticated around 10,000 years ago. Plants were independently cultivated in at least 11 regions of the world. In the 20th century, industrial agriculture based on large-scale monocultures came to dominate agricultural output.
As of 2021, small farms, of which the vast majority are one hectare (about 2.5 acres) or smaller, produce about one-third of the world's food. Moreover, five of every six farms in the world consist of fewer than 2 hectares (4.9 acres) and take up only around 12% of all agricultural land. In terms of total land use, large farms are dominant. While only 1% of all farms globally are greater than 50 hectares (120 acres), they encompass more than 70% of the world's farmland. Further, nearly 40% of all global agricultural land is found on farms larger than 1,000 hectares (2,500 acres).
Farms and farming greatly influence rural economics and greatly shape rural society, affecting both the direct agricultural workforce and broader businesses that support the farms and farming populations.
The major agricultural products can be broadly grouped into foods, fibers, fuels, and raw materials (such as rubber and timber). Food classes include cereals (grains), vegetables, fruits, cooking oils, meat, milk, eggs, and fungi. Global agricultural production amounts to approximately 11 billion tonnes of food, 32 million tonnes of natural fibers and 4 billion m3 of wood. However, around 14% of the world's food is lost from production before reaching the retail level.
Modern agronomy, plant breeding, agrochemicals such as pesticides and fertilizers, and technological developments have sharply increased crop yields, but also contributed to ecological and environmental damage. Selective breeding and modern practices in animal husbandry have similarly increased the output of meat, but have raised concerns about animal welfare and environmental damage. Environmental issues include contributions to climate change, depletion of aquifers, deforestation, antibiotic resistance, and other agricultural pollution. Agriculture is both a cause of and sensitive to environmental degradation, such as biodiversity loss, desertification, soil degradation, and climate change, all of which can cause decreases in crop yield. Genetically modified organisms are widely used, although some countries ban them.
== Etymology and scope ==
The word agriculture is a late Middle English adaptation of Latin agricultūra, from ager 'field' and cultūra 'cultivation' or 'growing'. Agriculture is defined with varying scopes, in its broadest sense using natural resources to "produce commodities which maintain life, including food, fiber, forest products, horticultural crops, and their related services". Thus defined, it includes arable farming, horticulture, animal husbandry and forestry, but horticulture and forestry are in practice often excluded.
It may also be broadly decomposed into plant agriculture, which concerns the cultivation of useful plants, and animal agriculture, the production of agricultural animals.
While agriculture usually refers to human activities, other species have been cultivating crops for up to 60 million years, such as some ant (see agriculture in ants), termite and beetle.
== History ==
=== Origins ===
The development of agriculture enabled the human population to grow many times larger than could be sustained by hunting and gathering. Agriculture began independently in different parts of the globe, and included a diverse range of taxa, in at least 11 separate centers of origin. Wild grains were collected and eaten from at least 105,000 years ago. In the Paleolithic Levant, 23,000 years ago, cereals cultivation of emmer, barley, and oats has been observed near the sea of Galilee. Rice was domesticated in China between 11,500 and 6200 BC with the earliest known cultivation from 5700 BC, followed by mung, soy and azuki beans. Sheep were domesticated in Mesopotamia between 13,000 and 11,000 years ago. Cattle were domesticated from the wild aurochs in the areas of modern Turkey and Pakistan some 10,500 years ago. Pig production emerged in Eurasia, including Europe, East Asia and Southwest Asia, where wild boar were first domesticated about 10,500 years ago. In the Andes of South America, the potato was domesticated between 10,000 and 7,000 years ago, along with beans, coca, llamas, alpacas, and guinea pigs. Sugarcane and some root vegetables were domesticated in New Guinea around 9,000 years ago. Sorghum was domesticated in the Sahel region of Africa by 7,000 years ago. Cotton was domesticated in Peru by 5,600 years ago, and was independently domesticated in Eurasia. In Mesoamerica, wild teosinte was bred into maize (corn) from 10,000 to 6,000 years ago. The horse was domesticated in the Eurasian Steppes around 3500 BC.
Scholars have offered multiple hypotheses to explain the historical origins of agriculture. Studies of the transition from hunter-gatherer to agricultural societies indicate an initial period of intensification and increasing sedentism; examples are the Natufian culture in the Levant, and the Early Chinese Neolithic in China. Then, wild stands that had previously been harvested started to be planted, and gradually came to be domesticated.
=== Civilizations ===
In Eurasia, the Sumerians started to live in villages from about 8000 BC, relying on the Tigris and Euphrates rivers and a canal system for irrigation. Ploughs appear in pictographs around 3000 BC; seed-ploughs around 2300 BC. Farmers grew wheat, barley, vegetables such as lentils and onions, and fruits including dates, grapes, and figs. Ancient Egyptian agriculture relied on the Nile River and its seasonal flooding. Farming started in the predynastic period at the end of the Paleolithic, after 10,000 BC. Staple food crops were grains such as wheat and barley, alongside industrial crops such as flax and papyrus. In India, wheat, barley and jujube were domesticated by 9000 BC, soon followed by sheep and goats. Cattle, sheep and goats were domesticated in Mehrgarh culture by 8000–6000 BC. Cotton was cultivated by the 5th–4th millennium BC. Archeological evidence indicates an animal-drawn plough from 2500 BC in the Indus Valley civilization.
In China, from the 5th century BC, there was a nationwide granary system and widespread silk farming. Water-powered grain mills were in use by the 1st century BC, followed by irrigation. By the late 2nd century, heavy ploughs had been developed with iron ploughshares and mouldboards. These spread westwards across Eurasia. Asian rice was domesticated 8,200–13,500 years ago – depending on the molecular clock estimate that is used– on the Pearl River in southern China with a single genetic origin from the wild rice Oryza rufipogon. In Greece and Rome, the major cereals were wheat, emmer, and barley, alongside vegetables including peas, beans, and olives. Sheep and goats were kept mainly for dairy products.
In the Americas, crops domesticated in Mesoamerica (apart from teosinte) include squash, beans, and cacao. Cocoa was domesticated by the Mayo Chinchipe of the upper Amazon around 3000 BC.
The turkey was probably domesticated in Mexico or the American Southwest. The Aztecs developed irrigation systems, formed terraced hillsides, fertilized their soil, and developed chinampas or artificial islands. The Mayas used extensive canal and raised field systems to farm swampland from 400 BC. In South America agriculture may have begun about 9000 BC with the domestication of squash (Cucurbita) and other plants. Coca was domesticated in the Andes, as were the peanut, tomato, tobacco, and pineapple. Cotton was domesticated in Peru by 3600 BC. Animals including llamas, alpacas, and guinea pigs were domesticated there. In North America, the indigenous people of the East domesticated crops such as sunflower, tobacco, squash and Chenopodium. Wild foods including wild rice and maple sugar were harvested. The domesticated strawberry is a hybrid of a Chilean and a North American species, developed by breeding in Europe and North America. The indigenous people of the Southwest and the Pacific Northwest practiced forest gardening and fire-stick farming. The natives controlled fire on a regional scale to create a low-intensity fire ecology that sustained a low-density agriculture in loose rotation; a sort of "wild" permaculture. A system of companion planting called the Three Sisters was developed in North America. The three crops were winter squash, maize, and climbing beans.
Indigenous Australians, long supposed to have been nomadic hunter-gatherers, practiced systematic burning, possibly to enhance natural productivity in fire-stick farming. Scholars have pointed out that hunter-gatherers need a productive environment to support gathering without cultivation. Because the forests of New Guinea have few food plants, early humans may have used "selective burning" to increase the productivity of the wild karuka fruit trees to support the hunter-gatherer way of life.
The Gunditjmara and other groups developed eel farming and fish trapping systems from some 5,000 years ago. There is evidence of 'intensification' across the whole continent over that period. In two regions of Australia, the central west coast and eastern central, early farmers cultivated yams, native millet, and bush onions, possibly in permanent settlements.
=== Revolution ===
In the Middle Ages, compared to the Roman period, agriculture in Western Europe became more focused on self-sufficiency. The agricultural population under feudalism was typically organized into manors consisting of several hundred or more acres of land presided over by a lord of the manor with a Roman Catholic church and priest.
Thanks to the exchange with the Al-Andalus where the Arab Agricultural Revolution was underway, European agriculture transformed, with improved techniques and the diffusion of crop plants, including the introduction of sugar, rice, cotton and fruit trees (such as the orange).
After 1492, the Columbian exchange brought New World crops such as maize, potatoes, tomatoes, sweet potatoes, and manioc to Europe, and Old World crops such as wheat, barley, rice, and turnips, and livestock (including horses, cattle, sheep and goats) to the Americas.
Irrigation, crop rotation, and fertilizers advanced from the 17th century with the British Agricultural Revolution, allowing global population to rise significantly. Since 1900, agriculture in developed nations, and to a lesser extent in the developing world, has seen large rises in productivity as mechanization replaces human labor, and assisted by synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, and selective breeding. The Haber-Bosch method allowed the synthesis of ammonium nitrate fertilizer on an industrial scale, greatly increasing crop yields and sustaining a further increase in global population.
== Types ==
Pastoralism involves managing domesticated animals. In nomadic pastoralism, herds of livestock are moved from place to place in search of pasture, fodder, and water. This type of farming is practiced in arid and semi-arid regions of Sahara, Central Asia and some parts of India.
In shifting cultivation, a small area of forest is cleared by cutting and burning the trees. The cleared land is used for growing crops for a few years until the soil becomes too infertile, and the area is abandoned. Another patch of land is selected and the process is repeated. This type of farming is practiced mainly in areas with abundant rainfall where the forest regenerates quickly. This practice is used in Northeast India, Southeast Asia, and the Amazon Basin.
Subsistence farming is practiced to satisfy family or local needs alone, with little left over for transport elsewhere. It is intensively practiced in Monsoon Asia and South-East Asia. An estimated 2.5 billion subsistence farmers worked in 2018, cultivating about 60% of the earth's arable land.
Intensive farming is cultivation to maximize productivity, with a low fallow ratio and a high use of inputs (water, fertilizer, pesticide and automation). It is practiced mainly in developed countries.
== Contemporary agriculture ==
=== Status ===
From the twentieth century onwards, intensive agriculture increased crop productivity. It substituted synthetic fertilizers and pesticides for labor, but caused increased water pollution, and often involved farm subsidies. Soil degradation and diseases such as stem rust are major concerns globally; approximately 40% of the world's agricultural land is seriously degraded. Modern agriculture has raised or encountered ecological, political, and economic issues including water pollution, biofuels, genetically modified organisms, tariffs and farm subsidies, leading to alternative approaches such as the organic movement. Unsustainable farming practices in North America led to the Dust Bowl of the 1930s. In recent years there has been a backlash against the environmental effects of conventional agriculture, resulting in the organic, regenerative, and sustainable agriculture movements. One of the major forces behind this movement has been the European Union, which first certified organic food in 1991 and began reform of its Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) in 2005 to phase out commodity-linked farm subsidies, also known as decoupling. The growth of organic farming has renewed research in alternative technologies such as integrated pest management, selective breeding, and controlled-environment agriculture. There are concerns about the lower yield associated with organic farming and its impact on global food security. Recent mainstream technological developments include genetically modified food.
During the 60-year period between 1964 and 2023, most of the increase in agricultural production was achieved through intensification, while the expansion of agricultural land was limited to just 8%.
In the twenty-first century, between 2001 and 2023, global agricultural area decreased by 78 million hectares (Mha) (−2%), with cropland area increasing by 78 Mha and permanent meadows and pastures decreasing by 151 Mha. These changes exhibit significant regional variations. Sub-Saharan Africa witnessed cropland expansion of 69 Mha accompanied by 72 Mha of forest loss, while Latin America saw 25 Mha of cropland growth alongside 85 Mha of net forest area loss. Agricultural expansion remains the primary driver of global deforestation, accounting for nearly 90% of forest loss. In this century, another important aspect to consider is that approximately 3.6 Mha of croplands are abandoned annually, with land degradation likely playing a significant role in these losses.
By 2015, the agricultural output of China was the largest in the world, followed by the European Union, India and the United States. Economists measure the total factor productivity of agriculture, according to which agriculture in the United States is roughly 1.7 times more productive than it was in 1948.
Agriculture employed 873 million people in 2021, or 27% of the global workforce, 916 million in 2023, compared with 1 027 million (or 40%) in 2000. The share of agriculture in global GDP was stable at around 4% since 2000–2023.
Despite increases in agricultural production and productivity, between 702 and 828 million people were affected by hunger in 2021. Food insecurity and malnutrition can be the result of conflict, climate extremes and variability and economic swings. It can also be caused by a country's structural characteristics such as income status and natural resource endowments as well as its political economy.
Pesticide use in agriculture went up 62% between 2000 and 2021, with the Americas accounting for half the use in 2021.
The International Fund for Agricultural Development posits that an increase in smallholder agriculture may be part of the solution to concerns about food prices and overall food security, given the favorable experience of Vietnam.
Disasters have inflicted an estimated USD 3.26 trillion in agricultural losses over 33 years (1991–2023), averaging at USD 99 billion per year, with cereal crops bearing the heaviest burden at 4.6 billion tonnes lost, followed by fruits and vegetables (2.8 billion tonnes), and with meat and dairy losing 900 million tonnes.
=== Workforce ===
Agriculture provides about one-quarter of all global employment, more than half in sub-Saharan Africa and almost 60 percent in low-income countries. As countries develop, other jobs have historically pulled workers away from agriculture, and labor-saving innovations increase agricultural productivity by reducing labor requirements per unit of output. Over time, a combination of labor supply and labor demand trends have driven down the share of population employed in agriculture.
During the 16th century in Europe, between 55 and 75% of the population was engaged in agriculture; by the 19th century, this had dropped to between 35 and 65%. In the same countries today, the figure is less than 10%.
At the start of the 21st century, some one billion people, or over 1/3 of the available work force, were employed in agriculture. This constitutes approximately 70% of the global employment of children, and in many countries constitutes the largest percentage of women of any industry. The service sector overtook the agricultural sector as the largest global employer in 2007.
In many developed countries, immigrants help fill labor shortages in high-value agriculture activities that are difficult to mechanize. Foreign farm workers from mostly Eastern Europe, North Africa and South Asia constituted around one-third of the salaried agricultural workforce in Spain, Italy, Greece and Portugal in 2013. In the United States of America, more than half of all hired farmworkers (roughly 450,000 workers) were immigrants in 2019, although the number of new immigrants arriving in the country to work in agriculture has fallen by 75 percent in recent years and rising wages indicate this has led to a major labor shortage on US farms.
==== Women in agriculture ====
Around the world, women make up a large share of the population employed in agriculture. This share is growing in all developing regions except East and Southeast Asia where women already make up about 50 percent of the agricultural workforce. Women make up 47 percent of the agricultural workforce in sub-Saharan Africa, a rate that has not changed significantly in the past few decades. However, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) posits that the roles and responsibilities of women in agriculture may be changing – for example, from subsistence farming to wage employment, and from contributing household members to primary producers in the context of male-out-migration.
In general, women account for a greater share of agricultural employment at lower levels of economic development, as inadequate education, limited access to basic infrastructure and markets, high unpaid work burden and poor rural employment opportunities outside agriculture severely limit women's opportunities for off-farm work.
Women who work in agricultural production tend to do so under highly unfavorable conditions. They tend to be concentrated in the poorest countries, where alternative livelihoods are not available, and they maintain the intensity of their work in conditions of climate-induced weather shocks and in situations of conflict. Women are less likely to participate as entrepreneurs and independent farmers and are engaged in the production of less lucrative crops.
The gender gap in land productivity between female- and male managed farms of the same size is 24 percent. On average, women earn 18.4 percent less than men in wage employment in agriculture; this means that women receive 82 cents for every dollar earned by men. Progress has been slow in closing gaps in women's access to irrigation and in ownership of livestock, too.
Women in agriculture still have significantly less access than men to inputs, including improved seeds, fertilizers and mechanized equipment. On a positive note, the gender gap in access to mobile internet in low- and middle-income countries fell from 25 percent to 16 percent between 2017 and 2021, and the gender gap in access to bank accounts narrowed from 9 to 6 percentage points. Women are as likely as men to adopt new technologies when the necessary enabling factors are put in place and they have equal access to complementary resources.
=== Safety ===
Agriculture, specifically farming, remains a hazardous industry, and farmers worldwide remain at high risk of work-related injuries, lung disease, noise-induced hearing loss, skin diseases, as well as certain cancers related to chemical use and prolonged sun exposure. On industrialized farms, injuries frequently involve the use of agricultural machinery, and a common cause of fatal agricultural injuries in developed countries is tractor rollovers. Pesticides and other chemicals used in farming can be hazardous to worker health, and workers exposed to pesticides may experience illness or have children with birth defects. As an industry in which families commonly share in work and live on the farm itself, entire families can be at risk for injuries, illness, and death. Ages 0–6 may be an especially vulnerable population in agriculture; common causes of fatal injuries among young farm workers include drowning, machinery and motor accidents, including with all-terrain vehicles. Occupational fatality data from the last decade indicate that, when looking at all industries, agriculture had the leading number of work-related deaths for youth. Within this industry, youth between the ages of 10 and 15 suffered the most non-fatal work-related injuries. While farming is hazardous, studies have looked at the fact that there are also many benefits to growing up and living on a farm.
The International Labor Organization considers agriculture "one of the most hazardous of all economic sectors". It estimates that the annual work-related death toll among agricultural employees is at least 170,000, twice the average rate of other jobs. In addition, incidences of death, injury and illness related to agricultural activities often go unreported. The organization has developed the Safety and Health in Agriculture Convention, 2001, which covers the range of risks in the agriculture occupation, the prevention of these risks and the role that individuals and organizations engaged in agriculture should play.
In the United States, agriculture has been identified by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health as a priority industry sector in the National Occupational Research Agenda to identify and provide intervention strategies for occupational health and safety issues.
In the European Union, the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work has issued guidelines on implementing health and safety directives in agriculture, livestock farming, horticulture, and forestry. The Agricultural Safety and Health Council of America (ASHCA) also holds a yearly summit to discuss safety.
=== Environmental impact ===
Extending over 4.8 billion ha in 2025 – the equivalent of one-third of the Earth's land surface – agriculture has a greater impact on land and water resources compared with any other economic sector. Pressure on land, soil and water resources has seriously compromised the performance and future prospects of agriculture, resulting in further loss of productive land and reduced water availability for farming and other forms of agricultural production. Agricultural expansion drives deforestation and is one of the primary causes of the degradation of carbon-rich ecosystems such as peatlands. An estimated 64% of agricultural land is at risk of pesticide pollution, which damages biodiversity by destroying pollinators, harms soil microbiota and makes agrifood systems less resilient to pests, pathogens and climate change. Accounting for 72% of global freshwater withdrawals, a figure predicted to rise further in the future, agriculture contributes to and is increasingly affected by water scarcity. Overexploitation of groundwater and seawater intrusion in coastal aquifers is widespread, with major implications for food security.
== Production ==
Overall production varies by country as listed.
=== Crop cultivation systems ===
Cropping systems vary among farms depending on the available resources and constraints; geography and climate of the farm; government policy; economic, social and political pressures; and the philosophy and culture of the farmer.
Shifting cultivation (or slash and burn) is a system in which forests are burnt, releasing nutrients to support cultivation of annual and then perennial crops for a period of several years. Then the plot is left fallow to regrow forest, and the farmer moves to a new plot, returning after many more years (10–20). This fallow period is shortened if population density grows, requiring the input of nutrients (fertilizer or manure) and some manual pest control. Annual cultivation is the next phase of intensity in which there is no fallow period. This requires even greater nutrient and pest control inputs.
Further industrialization led to the use of monocultures, when one cultivar is planted on a large acreage. Because of the low biodiversity, nutrient use is uniform and pests tend to build up, necessitating the greater use of pesticides and fertilizers. Multiple cropping, in which several crops are grown sequentially in one year, and intercropping, when several crops are grown at the same time, are other kinds of annual cropping systems known as polycultures.
In subtropical and arid environments, the timing and extent of agriculture may be limited by rainfall, either not allowing multiple annual crops in a year, or requiring irrigation. In all of these environments perennial crops are grown (coffee, chocolate) and systems are practiced such as agroforestry. In temperate environments, where ecosystems were predominantly grassland or prairie, highly productive annual farming is the dominant agricultural system.
Important categories of food crops include cereals, legumes, forage, fruits and vegetables. Natural fibers include cotton, wool, hemp, silk and flax. Specific crops are cultivated in distinct growing regions throughout the world. Production is listed in millions of metric tons, based on FAO estimates.
=== Livestock production systems ===
Animal husbandry is the breeding and raising of animals for meat, milk, eggs, or wool, and for work and transport. Working animals, including horses, mules, oxen, water buffalo, camels, llamas, alpacas, donkeys, and dogs, have for centuries been used to help cultivate fields, harvest crops, wrangle other animals, and transport farm products to buyers.
Livestock production systems can be defined based on feed source, as grassland-based, mixed, and landless. As of 2010, 30% of Earth's ice- and water-free area was used for producing livestock, with the sector employing approximately 1.3 billion people. Between the 1960s and the 2000s, there was a significant increase in livestock production, both by numbers and by carcass weight, especially among beef, pigs and chickens, the latter of which had production increased by almost a factor of 10. Non-meat animals, such as milk cows and egg-producing chickens, also showed significant production increases. Global cattle, sheep and goat populations are expected to continue to increase sharply through 2050. Aquaculture or fish farming, the production of fish for human consumption in confined operations, is one of the fastest growing sectors of food production, growing at an average of 9% a year between 1975 and 2007.
During the second half of the 20th century, producers using selective breeding focused on creating livestock breeds and crossbreeds that increased production, while mostly disregarding the need to preserve genetic diversity. This trend has led to a significant decrease in genetic diversity and resources among livestock breeds, leading to a corresponding decrease in disease resistance and local adaptations previously found among traditional breeds.
Grassland based livestock production relies upon plant material such as shrubland, rangeland, and pastures for feeding ruminant animals. Outside nutrient inputs may be used, however manure is returned directly to the grassland as a major nutrient source. This system is particularly important in areas where crop production is not feasible because of climate or soil, representing 30–40 million pastoralists. Mixed production systems use grassland, fodder crops and grain feed crops as feed for ruminant and monogastric (one stomach; mainly chickens and pigs) livestock. Manure is typically recycled in mixed systems as a fertilizer for crops.
Landless systems rely upon feed from outside the farm, representing the de-linking of crop and livestock production found more prevalently in Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development member countries. Synthetic fertilizers are more heavily relied upon for crop production and manure use becomes a challenge as well as a source for pollution. Industrialized countries use these operations to produce much of the global supplies of poultry and pork. Scientists estimate that 75% of the growth in livestock production between 2003 and 2030 will be in confined animal feeding operations, sometimes called factory farming. Much of this growth is happening in developing countries in Asia, with much smaller amounts of growth in Africa. Some of the practices used in commercial livestock production, including the usage of growth hormones, are controversial.
=== Production practices ===
Tillage is the practice of breaking up the soil with tools such as the plow or harrow to prepare for planting, for nutrient incorporation, or for pest control. Tillage varies in intensity from conventional to no-till. It can improve productivity by warming the soil, incorporating fertilizer and controlling weeds, but also renders soil more prone to erosion, triggers the decomposition of organic matter releasing CO2, and reduces the abundance and diversity of soil organisms.
Pest control includes the management of weeds, insects, mites, and diseases. Chemical (pesticides), biological (biocontrol), mechanical (tillage), and cultural practices are used. Cultural practices include crop rotation, culling, cover crops, intercropping, composting, avoidance, and resistance. Integrated pest management attempts to use all of these methods to keep pest populations below the number which would cause economic loss, and recommends pesticides as a last resort.
Nutrient management includes both the source of nutrient inputs for crop and livestock production, and the method of use of manure produced by livestock. Nutrient inputs can be chemical inorganic fertilizers, manure, green manure, compost and minerals. Crop nutrient use may also be managed using cultural techniques such as crop rotation or a fallow period. Manure is used either by holding livestock where the feed crop is growing, such as in managed intensive rotational grazing, or by spreading either dry or liquid formulations of manure on cropland or pastures.
Water management is needed where rainfall is insufficient or variable, which occurs to some degree in most regions of the world. Some farmers use irrigation to supplement rainfall. In other areas such as the Great Plains in the US and Canada, farmers use a fallow year to conserve soil moisture for the following year. Recent technological innovations in precision agriculture allow for water status monitoring and automate water usage, leading to more efficient management. Agriculture represents 70% of freshwater use worldwide. However, water withdrawal ratios for agriculture vary significantly by income level. In least developed countries and landlocked developing countries, water withdrawal ratios for agriculture are as high as 90 percent of total water withdrawals and about 60 percent in Small Island Developing States.
According to 2014 report by the International Food Policy Research Institute, agricultural technologies will have the greatest impact on food production if adopted in combination with each other. Using a model that assessed how eleven technologies could impact agricultural productivity, food security and trade by 2050, the International Food Policy Research Institute found that the number of people at risk from hunger could be reduced by as much as 40% and food prices could be reduced by almost half.
Payment for ecosystem services is a method of providing additional incentives to encourage farmers to conserve some aspects of the environment. Measures might include paying for reforestation upstream of a city, to improve the supply of fresh water.
=== Agricultural automation ===
Different definitions exist for agricultural automation and for the variety of tools and technologies that are used to automate production. One view is that agricultural automation refers to autonomous navigation by robots without human intervention. Alternatively, it is defined as the accomplishment of production tasks through mobile, autonomous, decision-making, mechatronic devices. However, FAO finds that these definitions do not capture all the aspects and forms of automation, such as robotic milking machines that are static, most motorized machinery that automates the performing of agricultural operations, and digital tools (e.g., sensors) that automate only diagnosis. FAO defines agricultural automation as the use of machinery and equipment in agricultural operations to improve their diagnosis, decision-making or performing, reducing the drudgery of agricultural work or improving the timeliness, and potentially the precision, of agricultural operations.
The technological evolution in agriculture has involved a progressive move from manual tools to animal traction, to motorized mechanization, to digital equipment and finally, to robotics with artificial intelligence (AI). Motorized mechanization using engine power automates the performance of agricultural operations such as ploughing and milking. With digital automation technologies, it also becomes possible to automate diagnosis and decision-making of agricultural operations. For example, autonomous crop robots can harvest and seed crops, while drones can gather information to help automate input application. Precision agriculture often employs such automation technologies. Motorized machines are increasingly complemented, or even superseded, by new digital equipment that automates diagnosis and decision-making. A conventional tractor, for example, can be converted into an automated vehicle allowing it to sow a field autonomously.
Motorized mechanization has increased significantly across the world in recent years, although reliable global data with broad country coverage exist only for tractors and only up to 2009. Sub-Saharan Africa is the only region where the adoption of motorized mechanization has stalled over the past decades.
Automation technologies are increasingly used for managing livestock, though evidence on adoption is lacking. Global automatic milking system sales have increased over recent years, but adoption is likely mostly in Northern Europe, and likely almost absent in low- and middle-income countries. Automated feeding machines for both cows and poultry also exist, but data and evidence regarding their adoption trends and drivers is likewise scarce.
Measuring the overall employment impacts of agricultural automation is difficult because it requires large amounts of data tracking all the transformations and the associated reallocation of workers both upstream and downstream. While automation technologies reduce labor needs for the newly automated tasks, they also generate new labor demand for other tasks, such as equipment maintenance and operation. Agricultural automation can also stimulate employment by allowing producers to expand production and by creating other agrifood systems jobs. This is especially true when it happens in context of rising scarcity of rural labor, as is the case in high-income countries and many middle-income countries. On the other hand, if forcedly promoted, for example through government subsidies in contexts of abundant rural labor, it can lead to labor displacement and falling or stagnant wages, particularly affecting poor and low-skilled workers.
=== Effects of climate change on yields ===
Climate change and agriculture are interrelated on a global scale. Climate change affects agriculture through changes in average temperatures, rainfall, and weather extremes (like storms and heat waves); changes in pests and diseases; changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide and ground-level ozone concentrations; changes in the nutritional quality of some foods; and changes in sea level. Global warming is already affecting agriculture, with effects unevenly distributed across the world.
In a 2022 report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change describes how human-induced warming has slowed growth of agricultural productivity over the past 50 years in mid and low latitudes. Methane emissions have negatively impacted crop yields by increasing temperatures and surface ozone concentrations. Warming is also negatively affecting crop and grassland quality and harvest stability. Ocean warming has decreased sustainable yields of some wild fish populations while ocean acidification and warming have already affected farmed aquatic species. Climate change will probably increase the risk of food insecurity for some vulnerable groups, such as the poor.
=== Future predictions ===
In order to meet the demands of a growing global population, agriculture needs to produce about 50% more food, feed and fibre by 2050 compared with the volumes it generated in 2012, according to estimates by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Achieving such objectives will place additional pressure on the world's already overstretched water, land and soil resources. In an increasing number of regions, food security and agrifood systems are at risk from unsustainable natural resource management practices, urban expansion, higher demand for food, water, energy and biomaterials, and persisting social and gender inequalities in access to and governance of resources.
== Crop alteration and biotechnology ==
=== Plant breeding ===
Crop alteration has been practiced by humankind for thousands of years, since the beginning of civilization. Altering crops through breeding practices changes the genetic make-up of a plant to develop crops with more beneficial characteristics for humans, for example, larger fruits or seeds, drought-tolerance, or resistance to pests. Significant advances in plant breeding ensued after the work of geneticist Gregor Mendel. His work on dominant and recessive alleles, although initially largely ignored for almost 50 years, gave plant breeders a better understanding of genetics and breeding techniques. Crop breeding includes techniques such as plant selection with desirable traits, self-pollination and cross-pollination, and molecular techniques that genetically modify the organism.
Domestication of plants has, over the centuries increased yield, improved disease resistance and drought tolerance, eased harvest and improved the taste and nutritional value of crop plants. Careful selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants. Plant selection and breeding in the 1920s and 1930s improved pasture (grasses and clover) in New Zealand. Extensive X-ray and ultraviolet induced mutagenesis efforts (i.e. primitive genetic engineering) during the 1950s produced the modern commercial varieties of grains such as wheat, corn (maize) and barley.
The Green Revolution popularized the use of conventional hybridization to sharply increase yield by creating "high-yielding varieties". For example, average yields of corn (maize) in the US have increased from around 2.5 tons per hectare (t/ha) (40 bushels per acre) in 1900 to about 9.4 t/ha (150 bushels per acre) in 2001. Similarly, worldwide average wheat yields have increased from less than 1 t/ha in 1900 to more than 2.5 t/ha in 1990. South American average wheat yields are around 2 t/ha, African under 1 t/ha, and Egypt and Arabia up to 3.5 to 4 t/ha with irrigation. In contrast, the average wheat yield in countries such as France is over 8 t/ha. Variations in yields are due mainly to variation in climate, genetics, and the level of intensive farming techniques (use of fertilizers, chemical pest control, and growth control to avoid lodging).
Investments into innovation for agriculture are long term. This is because it takes time for research to become commercialized and for technology to be adapted to meet multiple regions' needs, as well as meet national guidelines before being adopted and planted in a farmer's fields. For instance, it took at least 60 years from the introduction of hybrid corn technology before its adoption became widespread.
Agricultural innovation developed for the specific agroecological conditions of one region is not easily transferred and used in another region with different agroecological conditions. Instead, the innovation would have to be adapted to the specific conditions of that other region and respect its biodiversity and environmental requirements and guidelines. Some such adaptations can be seen through the steadily increasing number of plant varieties protected under the plant variety protection instrument administered by the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV).
=== Genetic engineering ===
Genetically modified organisms (GMO) are organisms whose genetic material has been altered by genetic engineering techniques generally known as recombinant DNA technology. Genetic engineering has expanded the genes available to breeders to use in creating desired germlines for new crops. Increased durability, nutritional content, insect and virus resistance and herbicide tolerance are a few of the attributes bred into crops through genetic engineering. For some, GMO crops cause food safety and food labeling concerns. Numerous countries have placed restrictions on the production, import or use of GMO foods and crops. The Biosafety Protocol, an international treaty, regulates the trade of GMOs. There is ongoing discussion regarding the labeling of foods made from GMOs, and the EU has had GMO food labeling requirements since 1997. As of 2022, the United States requires food containing GMO ingredients to be labeled as well.
Herbicide-resistant seeds have a gene implanted into their genome that allows the plants to tolerate exposure to herbicides, including glyphosate. These seeds allow the farmer to grow a crop that can be sprayed with herbicides to control weeds without harming the resistant crop. Herbicide-tolerant crops are used by farmers worldwide. With the increasing use of herbicide-tolerant crops, comes an increase in the use of glyphosate-based herbicide sprays. In some areas glyphosate resistant weeds have developed, causing farmers to switch to other herbicides. Some studies also link widespread glyphosate usage to iron deficiencies in some crops, which is both a crop production and a nutritional quality concern, with potential economic and health implications.
Other GMO crops used by growers include insect-resistant crops, which have a gene from the soil bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt), which produces a toxin specific to insects. These crops resist damage by insects. Some believe that similar or better pest-resistance traits can be acquired through traditional breeding practices, and resistance to various pests can be gained through hybridization or cross-pollination with wild species. In some cases, wild species are the primary source of resistance traits; some tomato cultivars that have gained resistance to at least 19 diseases did so through crossing with wild populations of tomatoes.
== Environmental impact ==
=== Effects and costs ===
Agriculture is both a cause of environmental degradation and sensitive to environmental degradation, such as biodiversity loss, desertification, soil degradation and climate change, which cause decreases in crop yield. Agriculture is one of the most important drivers of environmental pressures, particularly habitat change, climate change, water use and toxic emissions. Agriculture is the main source of toxins released into the environment, including insecticides, especially those used on cotton. The 2011 UNEP Green Economy report stated that agricultural operations produced some 13 percent of anthropogenic global greenhouse gas emissions. This includes gases from the use of inorganic fertilizers, agro-chemical pesticides, and herbicides, as well as fossil fuel-energy inputs.
Agriculture imposes multiple external costs upon society through effects such as pesticide damage to nature (especially herbicides and insecticides), nutrient runoff, excessive water usage, and loss of natural environment. A 2000 assessment of agriculture in the UK determined total external costs for 1996 of £2,343 million, or £208 per hectare. A 2005 analysis of these costs in the US concluded that cropland imposes approximately $5 to $16 billion ($30 to $96 per hectare), while livestock production imposes $714 million. Both studies, which focused solely on the fiscal impacts, concluded that more should be done to internalize external costs. Neither included subsidies in their analysis, but they noted that subsidies also influence the cost of agriculture to society.
Agriculture seeks to increase yield and to reduce costs, often employing measures that cut biodiversity to very low levels. Yield increases with inputs such as fertilizers and removal of pathogens, predators, and competitors (such as weeds). Costs decrease with increasing scale of farm units, such as making fields larger; this means removing hedges, ditches and other areas of habitat. Pesticides kill insects, plants and fungi. Effective yields fall with on-farm losses, which may be caused by poor production practices during harvesting, handling, and storage.
The environmental effects of climate change show that research on pests and diseases that do not generally afflict areas is essential. In 2021, farmers discovered stem rust on wheat in the Champagne area of France, a disease that had previously only occurred in Morocco for 20 to 30 years. Because of climate change, insects that used to die off over the winter are now alive and multiplying.
=== Livestock issues ===
A senior UN official, Henning Steinfeld, said that "Livestock are one of the most significant contributors to today's most serious environmental problems". Livestock production occupies 70% of all land used for agriculture, or 30% of the land surface of the planet. It is one of the largest sources of greenhouse gases, responsible for 18% of the world's greenhouse gas emissions as measured in CO2 equivalents. By comparison, all transportation emits 13.5% of the CO2. (This comparison later turned out to be an apples-and-oranges analogy.) It produces 65% of human-related nitrous oxide (which has 296 times the global warming potential of CO2) and 37% of all human-induced methane (which is 23 times as warming as CO2.) It also generates 64% of the ammonia emission. Livestock expansion is cited as a key factor driving deforestation; in the Amazon basin 70% of previously forested area is now occupied by pastures and the remainder used for feed crops. Through deforestation and land degradation, livestock is also driving reductions in biodiversity. A well documented phenomenon is woody plant encroachment, caused by overgrazing in rangelands. Furthermore, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) states that "methane emissions from global livestock are projected to increase by 60 percent by 2030 under current practices and consumption patterns."
=== Land and water issues ===
Land transformation, the use of land to yield goods and services, is the most substantial way humans alter the Earth's ecosystems, and is the driving force causing biodiversity loss. Estimates of the amount of land transformed by humans vary from 39 to 50%. It is estimated that 24% of land globally experiences land degradation, a long-term decline in ecosystem function and productivity, with cropland being disproportionately affected. Land management is the driving factor behind degradation; 1.5 billion people rely upon the degrading land. Degradation can be through deforestation, desertification, soil erosion, mineral depletion, acidification, or salinization. In 2021, the global agricultural land area was 4.79 billion hectares (ha), down 2 percent, or 0.09 billion ha compared with 2000. Between 2000 and 2021, roughly two-thirds of agricultural land were used for permanent meadows and pastures (3.21 billion ha in 2021), which declined by 5 percent (0.17 billion ha). One-third of the total agricultural land was cropland (1.58 billion ha in 2021), which increased by 6 percent (0.09 billion ha). Within the U.S., total agricultural land use is estimated to be 56%, and including grazing, animal agriculture constitutes around 80% of agricultural land.
Eutrophication, excessive nutrient enrichment in aquatic ecosystems resulting in algal blooms and anoxia, leads to fish kills, loss of biodiversity, and renders water unfit for drinking and other industrial uses. Excessive fertilization and manure application to cropland, as well as high livestock stocking densities cause nutrient (mainly nitrogen and phosphorus) runoff and leaching from agricultural land. These nutrients are major nonpoint pollutants contributing to eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems and pollution of groundwater, with harmful effects on human populations. Fertilizers also reduce terrestrial biodiversity by increasing competition for light, favoring those species that are able to benefit from the added nutrients.
Agriculture simultaneously is facing growing freshwater demand and precipitation anomalies (droughts, floods, and extreme rainfall and weather events) on rainfed areas fields and grazing lands. Agriculture accounts for 70 percent of withdrawals of freshwater resources, and an estimated 41 percent of current global irrigation water use occurs at the expense of environmental flow requirements. Within the U.S., agriculture accounts for about 80% of total water consumption, with animal agriculture making up half of agricultural consumption (around 40%). It is long known that aquifers in areas as diverse as northern China, the Upper Ganges and the western US are being depleted, and new research extends these problems to aquifers in Iran, Mexico and Saudi Arabia. Increasing pressure is being placed on water resources by industry and urban areas, meaning that water scarcity is increasing and agriculture is facing the challenge of producing more food for the world's growing population with reduced water resources. While industrial withdrawals have declined in the past few decades and municipal withdrawals have increased only marginally since 2010, agricultural withdrawals have continued to grow at an ever faster pace. Agricultural water usage can also cause major environmental problems, including the destruction of natural wetlands, the spread of water-borne diseases, and land degradation through salinization and waterlogging, when irrigation is performed incorrectly.
=== Pesticides ===
Pesticide use has increased since 1950 to 2.5 million short tons annually worldwide, yet crop loss from pests has remained relatively constant. The World Health Organization estimated in 1992 that three million pesticide poisonings occur annually, causing 220,000 deaths. Pesticides select for pesticide resistance in the pest population, leading to a condition termed the "pesticide treadmill" in which pest resistance warrants the development of a new pesticide.
An alternative argument is that the way to "save the environment" and prevent famine is by using pesticides and intensive high yield farming, a view exemplified by a quote heading the Center for Global Food Issues website: 'Growing more per acre leaves more land for nature'. However, critics argue that a trade-off between the environment and a need for food is not inevitable, and that pesticides can replace good agronomic practices such as crop rotation. The Push–pull agricultural pest management technique involves intercropping, using plant aromas to repel pests from crops (push) and to lure them to a place from which they can then be removed (pull).
=== Contribution to climate change ===
Agriculture contributes towards climate change through greenhouse gas emissions and by the conversion of non-agricultural land such as forests into agricultural land. The agriculture, forestry and land use sector contribute between 13% and 21% of global greenhouse gas emissions. Emissions of nitrous oxide, methane make up over half of total greenhouse gas emission from agriculture. Animal husbandry is a major source of greenhouse gas emissions.
Approximately 57% of global GHG emissions from the production of food are from the production of animal-based food while plant-based foods contribute 29% and the remaining 14% is for other utilizations. Farmland management and land-use change represented major shares of total emissions (38% and 29%, respectively), whereas rice and beef were the largest contributing plant- and animal-based commodities (12% and 25%, respectively). South and Southeast Asia and South America were the largest emitters of production-based GHGs.
=== Effects of climate change on agriculture ===
Climate change put significant part of crops in danger already at 1.5 degrees of warming. While in North America, Europe and central Asia the share of endangered crops is relatively little at this level of warming, in the Middle east and North Africa region for example, close to 50% of cropland is in danger. With further temperature rise the risk increase in all regions, in some more, in some less. Globally the cropland area in safe climatic zone decrease for all the major crop groups as warming exceed 1.5 degrees.
=== Sustainability ===
Current farming methods have resulted in over-stretched water resources, high levels of erosion and reduced soil fertility. There is not enough water to continue farming using current practices; therefore how water, land, and ecosystem resources are used to boost crop yields must be reconsidered. A solution would be to give value to ecosystems, recognizing environmental and livelihood tradeoffs, and balancing the rights of a variety of users and interests. Inequities that result when such measures are adopted would need to be addressed, such as the reallocation of water from poor to rich, the clearing of land to make way for more productive farmland, or the preservation of a wetland system that limits fishing rights.
Technological advancements help provide farmers with tools and resources to make farming more sustainable. Technology permits innovations like conservation tillage, a farming process which helps prevent land loss to erosion, reduces water pollution, and enhances carbon sequestration.
Agricultural automation can help address some of the challenges associated with climate change and thus facilitate adaptation efforts. For example, the application of digital automation technologies (e.g. in precision agriculture) can improve resource-use efficiency in conditions which are increasingly constrained for agricultural producers. Moreover, when applied to sensing and early warning, they can help address the uncertainty and unpredictability of weather conditions associated with accelerating climate change.
Other potential sustainable practices include conservation agriculture, agroforestry, improved grazing, avoided grassland conversion, and biochar. Current mono-crop farming practices in the United States preclude widespread adoption of sustainable practices, such as 2–3 crop rotations that incorporate grass or hay with annual crops, unless negative emission goals such as soil carbon sequestration become policy.
The food demand of Earth's projected population, with current climate change predictions, could be satisfied by improvement of agricultural methods, expansion of agricultural areas, and a sustainability-oriented consumer mindset.
=== Energy dependence ===
Since the 1940s, agricultural productivity has increased dramatically, due largely to the increased use of energy-intensive mechanization, fertilizers and pesticides. The vast majority of this energy input comes from fossil fuel sources. Between the 1960s and the 1980s, the Green Revolution transformed agriculture around the globe, with world grain production increasing significantly (between 70% and 390% for wheat and 60% to 150% for rice, depending on geographic area) as world population doubled. Heavy reliance on petrochemicals has raised concerns that oil shortages could increase costs and reduce agricultural output.
Industrialized agriculture depends on fossil fuels in two fundamental ways: direct consumption on the farm and manufacture of inputs used on the farm. Direct consumption includes the use of lubricants and fuels to operate farm vehicles and machinery.
Indirect consumption includes the manufacture of fertilizers, pesticides, and farm machinery. In particular, the production of nitrogen fertilizer can account for over half of agricultural energy usage. Together, direct and indirect consumption by US farms accounts for about 2% of the nation's energy use. Direct and indirect energy consumption by US farms peaked in 1979, and has since gradually declined. Food systems encompass not just agriculture but off-farm processing, packaging, transporting, marketing, consumption, and disposal of food and food-related items. Agriculture accounts for less than one-fifth of food system energy use in the US.
=== Plastic pollution ===
Plastic products are used extensively in agriculture, including to increase crop yields and improve the efficiency of water and agrichemical use. "Agriplastic" products include films to cover greenhouses and tunnels, mulch to cover soil (e.g. to suppress weeds, conserve water, increase soil temperature and aid fertilizer application), shade cloth, pesticide containers, seedling trays, protective mesh and irrigation tubing. The polymers most commonly used in these products are low-density polyethylene (LPDE), linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE), polypropylene (PP) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
The total amount of plastics used in agriculture is difficult to quantify. A 2012 study reported that almost 6.5 million tonnes per year were consumed globally while a later study estimated that global demand in 2015 was between 7.3 million and 9 million tonnes. Widespread use of plastic mulch and lack of systematic collection and management have led to the generation of large amounts of mulch residue. Weathering and degradation eventually cause the mulch to fragment. These fragments and larger pieces of plastic accumulate in soil. Mulch residue has been measured at levels of 50 to 260 kg per hectare in topsoil in areas where mulch use dates back more than 10 years, which confirms that mulching is a major source of both microplastic and macroplastic soil contamination.
Agricultural plastics, especially plastic films, are not easy to recycle because of high contamination levels (up to 40–50% by weight contamination by pesticides, fertilizers, soil and debris, moist vegetation, silage juice water, and UV stabilizers) and collection difficulties . Therefore, they are often buried or abandoned in fields and watercourses or burned. These disposal practices lead to soil degradation and can result in contamination of soils and leakage of microplastics into the marine environment as a result of precipitation run-off and tidal washing. In addition, additives in residual plastic film (such as UV and thermal stabilizers) may have deleterious effects on crop growth, soil structure, nutrient transport and salt levels. There is a risk that plastic mulch will deteriorate soil quality, deplete soil organic matter stocks, increase soil water repellence and emit greenhouse gases. Microplastics released through fragmentation of agricultural plastics can absorb and concentrate contaminants capable of being passed up the trophic chain.
== Disciplines ==
=== Agricultural economics ===
Agricultural economics is economics as it relates to the "production, distribution and consumption of [agricultural] goods and services". Combining agricultural production with general theories of marketing and business as a discipline of study began in the late 1800s, and grew significantly through the 20th century. Although the study of agricultural economics is relatively recent, major trends in agriculture have significantly affected national and international economies throughout history, ranging from tenant farmers and sharecropping in the post–American Civil War Southern United States to the European feudal system of manorialism. In the United States, and elsewhere, food costs attributed to food processing, distribution, and agricultural marketing, sometimes referred to as the value chain, have risen while the costs attributed to farming have declined. This is related to the greater efficiency of farming, combined with the increased level of value addition (e.g. more highly processed products) provided by the supply chain. Market concentration has increased in the sector as well, and although the total effect of the increased market concentration is likely increased efficiency, the changes redistribute economic surplus from producers (farmers) and consumers, and may have negative implications for rural communities.
National government policies, such as taxation, subsidies, tariffs and others, can significantly change the economic marketplace for agricultural products. Since at least the 1960s, a combination of trade restrictions, exchange rate policies and subsidies have affected farmers in both the developing and the developed world. In the 1980s, non-subsidized farmers in developing countries experienced adverse effects from national policies that created artificially low global prices for farm products. Between the mid-1980s and the early 2000s, several international agreements limited agricultural tariffs, subsidies and other trade restrictions.
However, as of 2009, there was still a significant amount of policy-driven distortion in global agricultural product prices. The three agricultural products with the most trade distortion were sugar, milk and rice, mainly due to taxation. Among the oilseeds, sesame had the most taxation, but overall, feed grains and oilseeds had much lower levels of taxation than livestock products. Since the 1980s, policy-driven distortions have decreases more among livestock products than crops during the worldwide reforms in agricultural policy. Despite this progress, certain crops, such as cotton, still see subsidies in developed countries artificially deflating global prices, causing hardship in developing countries with non-subsidized farmers. Unprocessed commodities such as corn, soybeans, and cattle are generally graded to indicate quality, affecting the price the producer receives. Commodities are generally reported by production quantities, such as volume, number or weight.
=== Agricultural science ===
Agricultural science is a broad multidisciplinary field of biology that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic and social sciences used in the practice and understanding of agriculture. It covers topics such as agronomy, plant breeding and genetics, plant pathology, crop modeling, soil science, entomology, production techniques and improvement, study of pests and their management, and study of adverse environmental effects such as soil degradation, waste management, and bioremediation.
The scientific study of agriculture began in the 18th century, when Johann Friedrich Mayer conducted experiments on the use of gypsum (hydrated calcium sulphate) as a fertilizer. Research became more systematic when in 1843, John Lawes and Henry Gilbert began a set of long-term agronomy field experiments at Rothamsted Research Station in England; some of them, such as the Park Grass Experiment, are still running. In America, the Hatch Act of 1887 provided funding for what it was the first to call "agricultural science", driven by farmers' interest in fertilizers. In agricultural entomology, the USDA began to research biological control in 1881; it instituted its first large program in 1905, searching Europe and Japan for natural enemies of the spongy moth and brown-tail moth, establishing parasitoids (such as solitary wasps) and predators of both pests in the US.
== Policy ==
Agricultural policy is the set of government decisions and actions relating to domestic agriculture and imports of foreign agricultural products. Governments usually implement agricultural policies with the goal of achieving a specific outcome in the domestic agricultural product markets. Some overarching themes include risk management and adjustment (including policies related to climate change, food safety and natural disasters), economic stability (including policies related to taxes), natural resources and environmental sustainability (especially water policy), research and development, and market access for domestic commodities (including relations with global organizations and agreements with other countries). Agricultural policy can also touch on food quality, ensuring that the food supply is of a consistent and known quality, food security, ensuring that the food supply meets the population's needs, and conservation. Policy programs can range from financial programs, such as subsidies, to encouraging producers to enroll in voluntary quality assurance programs.
A 2021 report finds that globally, support to agricultural producers accounts for almost US$540 billion a year. This amounts to 15 percent of total agricultural production value, and is heavily biased towards measures that are leading to inefficiency, as well as are unequally distributed and harmful for the environment and human health. Crop use in animal agriculture accounts for one form of inefficiency. Animal agriculture's estimated land use to produce one kilocalorie or gram of protein is 50 to 100 times that of plant-based alternatives. Furthermore, the larger the livestock, the lower the energy efficiency (kilocalories obtained relative to kilocalories the animal consumes). For instance, beef's energy efficiency is estimated to be 2%.
=== Lobbying ===
Agribusiness, environmental groups, agricultural labor unions and organizations representing individual agricultural commodities tend to engage in agricultural lobbying. Agricultural lobbying can result in higher immigration than the preference of the median voter. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) leads international efforts to defeat hunger and provides a forum for the negotiation of global agricultural regulations and agreements. Samuel Jutzi, director of FAO's animal production and health division, states that lobbying by large corporations has stopped reforms that would improve human health and the environment. For example, proposals in 2010 for a voluntary code of conduct for the livestock industry that would have provided incentives for improving standards for health, and environmental regulations, such as the number of animals an area of land can support without long-term damage, were successfully defeated due to large food company pressure.
== See also ==
== Sources ==
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY 4.0 (license statement/permission). Text taken from The State of Food and Agriculture 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY 4.0 (license statement/permission). Text taken from The State of the World's Land and Water Resources for Food and Agriculture 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY 4.0 (license statement/permission). Text taken from The Impact of Disasters on Agriculture and Food Security 2025​, The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
== References ==
== Cited sources ==
Acquaah, George (2002). Principles of Crop Production: Theory, Techniques, and Technology. Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-022133-9.
Chrispeels, Maarten J.; Sadava, David E. (1994). Plants, Genes, and Agriculture. Boston, Massachusetts: Jones and Bartlett. ISBN 978-0-86720-871-9.
Needham, Joseph (1986). Science and Civilization in China. Taipei: Caves Books.
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO (license statement/permission). Text taken from Drowning in Plastics – Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics​, United Nations Environment Programme.
This article incorporates text from a free content work (license statement/permission). Text taken from In Brief: The State of Food and Agriculture 2019. Moving forward on food loss and waste reduction​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work (license statement/permission). Text taken from In Brief to The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2022. Repurposing food and agricultural policies to make healthy diets more affordable​, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work (license statement/permission). Text taken from In Brief: The State of Food and Agriculture 2018. Migration, agriculture and rural development​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work (license statement/permission). Text taken from In Brief to The State of Food and Agriculture 2022. Leveraging automation in agriculture for transforming agrifood systems​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work (license statement/permission). Text taken from Enabling inclusive agricultural automation​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 (license statement/permission). Text taken from The status of women in agrifood systems – Overview​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0 (license statement/permission). Text taken from World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2023​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY 4.0 (license statement/permission). Text taken from World Intellectual Property Report 2024 - The importance of local capabilities in AgTech specialization​, WIPO, WIPO.
== External links ==
Food and Agriculture Organization
United States Department of Agriculture
Agriculture material from the World Bank Group
Agriculture collected news and commentary at The New York Times
Agriculture collected news and commentary at The Guardian

A crop is a plant or plant product harvested for human use. Crops are cultivated at scale to produce food, fiber, fuel, and other products. Crops have been central to human civilization since the first agricultural revolution, a key stage in the broader history of agriculture, when early societies domesticated plants for food and trade. Today, a small number of staple crops such as rice, wheat, maize, and sugarcane account for the majority of global production. Because of their economic importance, crops are studied within several scientific disciplines, including agronomy, agricultural science, horticulture, and forestry.
== Types ==
According to the classification of crops by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the following table is a simplified list of crop types, common examples, and their primary end use. A crop may have several end uses, and according to the FAO: "End use refers to the purpose of the crop. Crops may be grown for use as food for human consumption or as feed for animals, for producing biofuels or for non-food products, such as tobacco and flowers. A single crop may have more than one use, such as maize being grown partly for human consumption, partly as a fodder crop and partly for producing biofuels."
In agriculture, the term crop is sometimes applied to plants that are not grown for direct harvest but instead serve supporting roles. A cover crop is planted to protect and improve soil health, reduce erosion, and enhance fertility rather than for sale. A nurse crop is an annual plant species sown alongside a slower‑establishing perennial plant to shelter seedlings, suppress weeds, and stabilize soil. A trap crop is planted to attract pests away from the main crop, reducing damage without relying solely on pesticides. These uses show that the term crop can refer not only to plants cultivated for production but also to those managed for ecological or protective functions.
== Methods of cropping ==
Crop production may fall under these categories:
Agriculture: the practice of farming, including soil cultivation and crop growing
Horticulture: focuses on plant cultivation and includes the subspecialties of fruticulture (fruits and nuts), viticulture (grape vines), olericulture (vegetables and herbs), floriculture (flowers)
Silviculture: managing forest growth and health, including for timber production
There are various methods of cropping that are used, and each method of cropping has advantages and disadvantages.
Monoculture: growing one crop species in a field at a time
Monocropping: growing a single crop year after year on the same land
Crop rotation: growing a series of different types of crops in the same area across a sequence of growing seasons
Polyculture, intercropping and multiple cropping: growing more than one crop together in the same place at the same time
Monoculture is typical where row crops are planted mechanically, and crops are usually rotated between seasons or from year to year. An example is in the Southeast US, a 3-crop rotation over two years of: corn - winter wheat - soybeans - winter cover crop. Though studies show that rotating crops produce better yields, monocropping is still common in South America (soybeans), Africa (maize), and South Asia (rice).
Crops are typically cultivated in alignment with seasonal patterns, as different plants thrive under specific climate conditions. For example, on the Indian subcontinent this is formalized into three distinct categories: kharif crops, grown during the monsoon; rabi crops, cultivated in winter; and zaid crops, planted in the short summer period between the other two.
Permaculture is a design philosophy that seeks to create sustainable agriculture systems by mimicking natural ecosystems, and often incorporates practices such as polyculture, agroforestry, and crop rotation.
== Global production ==
As of 2004, of the estimated 50,000 edible plant species, only about 300 had been domesticated as crop plants, and 90 percent of cropland was made up of just fifteen plant species, with rice, wheat, soybeans, cotton, and maize being the top five. Just four crops accounted for half the global primary crop production in 2023: sugar cane (20%), maize (13%), wheat (8%) and rice (8%).
Between 2000 and 2023, there was an increase in global production of primary crops by 61% to 9.9 billion tonnes (3.7 billion tonnes more than in 2000). Cereals represented the main group of crops produced in 2023 (32%), followed by sugar crops (23%), vegetables (12%), oil crops (12%), fruit (10%), and roots and tubers (9%). This production increase is mainly due to a combination of factors, including an increased use of irrigation, pesticides and fertilizers, more cultivated area, better farming practices, and use of high-yield crops.
During the same period, the value of primary crops production increased at a slightly higher pace than the quantities produced (52%), from USD 2.0 trillion in 2000 to USD 3.0 trillion in 2023. Cereals accounted for the largest share of the total production value in 2023 (29%), vegetables (19%), fruit (17%), oil crops (12%), roots and tubers (9%), and sugar crops (3%).
In 2023, the global average dietary energy supply exceeded 3,000 kilocalories per person per day. Cereals provided 42% of the global dietary energy supply, followed by 13% of oil crops, and 8% of sugar crops. Human consumption accounted for 45% of cereals, 42% of oils, 88% of vegetables, and 83% of fruits. Animal feed accounted for 35% of cereals and 24% of legumes. Non-food uses of crops have been increasing, comprising 45% of oils in 2023. International trade also plays a major role, with 46% of oil crops, 34% of sugars, 20% of cereals, and 26% of legumes exported.
As of 2019, 13% of global farmland was planted with genetically modified crops. Countries with the largest percentage of global GM crop production were the USA (38%), Brazil (28%), Argentina (13%), Canada (7%), and India (6%).
The production of primary crops was 9.9 billion tonnes in 2023, 61% more than in 2000. Four crops account for about half of global primary crop production in 2023: sugar cane, maize, wheat and rice.
While a multitude of crops are cultivated and harvested around the world, just four individual crops accounted for half the global production of primary crops in 2023: sugar cane (20% of the total, with 2.0 billion tonnes), maize (13%, with 1.2 billion tonnes), wheat (8%, with 0.8 billion tonnes) and rice (8%t, with 0.8 billion tonnes) Oil palm fruit and potatoes each accounted for an additional 4% (0.4 billion tonnes) of world crop production. The Americas were the leading region in the production of sugar cane and maize (50% of the world total) in 2023, while Asia led in the production of rice (90%), oil palm fruit (87%), potatoes (53%) and wheat (44%).
== See also ==
Cash crop – Agricultural crop grown to sell for profit
Subsistence agriculture – Farming to meet basic needs
Founder crops – Original agricultural crops
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY 4.0 (license statement/permission). Text taken from World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
== Further reading ==
Sleper, David A.; Poehlman, John M. (2006). Breeding Field Crops. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 9780813824284. Retrieved 5 December 2011.

A fertilizer or fertiliser is any material of natural or synthetic origin that is applied to soil or to plant tissues to supply plant nutrients. Fertilizers may be distinct from liming materials or other non-nutrient soil amendments. Many sources of fertilizer exist, both natural and industrially produced. For most modern agricultural practices, fertilization focuses on three main macronutrients: nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K) with occasional addition of supplements like rock flour for micronutrients. Farmers apply these fertilizers in a variety of ways: through dry or pelletized or liquid application processes, using large agricultural equipment, or hand-tool methods.
Historically, fertilization came from natural or organic sources: compost, animal manure, human manure, harvested minerals, crop rotations, and byproducts of human-nature industries (e.g. fish processing waste, or bloodmeal from animal slaughter). However, starting in the 19th century, after innovations in plant nutrition following Justus von Liebig's discoveries, an agricultural industry developed around synthetically created agrochemical fertilizers. This transition was important in transforming the global food system towards larger-scale industrial agriculture with large crop yields in monocultures.
The invention of Haber process for producing ammonia for nitrogen in the 20th century combined with amplified chemical production capacity created during World War II led to a boom in using nitrogen fertilizers. In the latter half of the 20th century, increased use of nitrogen fertilizers (800% increase between 1961 and 2019) has been a crucial component of the increased productivity of conventional food systems as part of the so-called "Green Revolution".
Fertilizers, especially when applied excessively, can have environmental consequences such as water pollution and eutrophication due to nutrient runoff. Additionally, the chemical process for creating the fertilizers results in byproducts, including carbon and other emissions. In some cases contamination and pollution of soil result by accumulation of heavy metals contained in some fertilizers collected through mining. Sustainable agricultural practices, such as reduced tillage and planting buffer strips, can minimize these adverse environmental effects.
== History ==
Management of soil fertility has preoccupied farmers since the beginning of agriculture. Middle Eastern, Chinese, Mesoamerican, and cultures of the Central Andes were all early adopters of agriculture. This is thought to have led to their cultures growing faster in population which allowed an exportation of culture to neighboring hunter-gatherer groups. Fertilizer use along with agriculture allowed some of these early societies a critical advantage over their neighbors, leading them to become dominant cultures in their respective regions. Egyptians, Romans, Babylonians, and early Germans are all recorded as using minerals or manure to enhance the productivity of their farms. The scientific research of plant nutrition started well before the work of German chemist Justus von Liebig although his name is most mentioned as the "father of the fertilizer industry". Nicolas Théodore de Saussure and scientific colleagues at the time were quick to disprove the simplifications of von Liebig. Prominent scientists whom von Liebig drew were Carl Ludwig Sprenger and Hermann Hellriegel. In this field, a 'knowledge erosion' took place, partly driven by an intermingling of economics and research. John Bennet Lawes, an English entrepreneur, began experimenting on the effects of various manures on plants growing in pots in 1837, and a year or two later the experiments were extended to crops in the field. One immediate consequence was that in 1842 he patented a manure formed by treating phosphates with sulfuric acid, and thus was the first to create the artificial manure industry. In the succeeding year, he enlisted the services of Joseph Henry Gilbert; together they performed crop experiments at the Institute of Arable Crops Research.
The Birkeland–Eyde process was one of the competing industrial processes at the beginning of nitrogen-based fertilizer production. This process was used to fix atmospheric nitrogen (N2) into nitric acid (HNO3), one of several chemical processes called nitrogen fixation. The resultant nitric acid was then used as a source of nitrate (NO3−). A factory based on the process was built in Rjukan and Notodden in Norway and large hydroelectric power facilities were built.
The 1910s and 1920s witnessed the rise of the Haber process and the Ostwald process. The Haber process produces ammonia (NH3) from methane (CH4) (natural gas) and molecular nitrogen (N2) from the air. The ammonia from the Haber process is then partially converted into nitric acid (HNO3) in the Ostwald process. It is estimated that a third of annual global food production uses ammonia from the Haber–Bosch process and that this supports nearly half the world's population. After World War II, nitrogen production plants that had ramped up for wartime bomb manufacturing were pivoted towards agricultural uses. The use of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers has increased steadily over the last 50 years of the 20th century, rising almost 20-fold to a rate of 100 million tonnes of nitrogen per year in 2003.
The development of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers has significantly supported global population growth. It has been estimated that almost half the people on the Earth are currently fed due to synthetic nitrogen fertilizer use. The use of phosphate fertilizers has also increased from 9 million tonnes per year in 1960 to 40 million tonnes per year in 2000, but future phosphorus fertilizer availability is now a critical issue.
Agricultural use of inorganic fertilizers in 2021 was 195 million tonnes of nutrients, of which 56% was nitrogen. Asia represented 53% of the world's total agricultural use of inorganic fertilizers in 2021, followed by the Americas (29%), Europe (12%), Africa (4%) and Oceania (2%). This ranking of the regions is the same for all nutrients. The main users of inorganic fertilizers are, in descending order, China, India, Brazil, and the United States of America (see Table 15), with China the largest user of each nutrient. Agricultural use of inorganic fertilizers in 2023 was 190 million tonnes of nutrients, of which 112 million tonnes (58%) was nitrogen.
A maize crop yielding 6–9 tonnes of grain per hectare (2.5 acres) requires 31–50 kilograms (68–110 lb) of phosphate fertilizer to be applied; soybean crops require about half, 20–25 kg per hectare. Yara International is the world's largest producer of nitrogen-based fertilizers.
== Mechanism ==
Fertilizers enhance the growth of plants. This goal is met in two ways, the traditional one being additives that provide nutrients. The second mode by which some fertilizers act is to enhance the effectiveness of the soil by modifying its water-holding capacity and aeration. This article, like many on fertilizers, emphasizes the nutritional aspect.
Fertilizers typically provide, in varying proportions:
Three main macronutrients (NPK):
Nitrogen (N): leaf growth and stems;
Phosphorus (P): development of roots, flowers, seeds and fruit;
Potassium (K): strong stem growth, movement of water in plants, promotion of flowering and fruiting;
Micronutrients: copper (Cu), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), molybdenum (Mo), zinc (Zn), and boron (B). Of occasional significance are silicon (Si), cobalt (Co), and vanadium (V).
Although calcium uptake by plant roots has long-time been considered as luxury consumption, it is now considered as an essential element for its various roles in the maintenance of the integrity of plant cell walls and cell membranes. Liming has also a decisive and positive influence on crop yields by couteracting soil acidification, a side-effect of plant growth and nutrient export by crops, improving soil structure, and thus soil aeration, and increasing soil biological activity, thereby soil fertility, in particular through increased nitrification.
The nutrients required for healthy plant life are classified according to the elements, but the elements are not used as fertilizers. Instead, compounds containing these elements are the basis of fertilizers. Macro-nutrients are present in plant tissue in quantities from 0.15% to 6.0% on a dry matter (DM) (0% moisture) basis but they are sometimes consumed in larger quantities than required (luxury consumption), in particular when fertilizers are used in excess of plant requirements (overfertilization). Plants are made up of four main elements: hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen. Carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen are widely available respectively in carbon dioxide and in water. Although nitrogen makes up most of the atmosphere, it is in a form that is unavailable to plants. Nitrogen is the most important fertilizer since nitrogen is present in proteins (amide bonds between amino acids), DNA (puric and pyrimidic bases), and other components (e.g., tetrapyrrolic heme in chlorophyll). It is common tenet that nitrogen is absent from the parent rock and thus cannot be obtained from mineral weathering, although recent studies point to the equal importance of the atmosphere and bedrock as nitrogen sources. Nitrogen is made available to plants through weathering of nitrogen-containing parent rocks and nitrogen fixation. Only some free-living (e.g. Clostridium) and symbiotic bacteria living in root systems of host plants (notably legumes) can fix atmospheric nitrogen (N2) by converting it to ammonia (NH3) and amino acids which are available to plants. Phosphate (PO3−4) is required for the production of DNA (genetic code) and ATP, the main energy carrier in cells, as well as certain lipids (phospholipids, the main components of the lipidic double layer of the cell membranes).
=== Microbiological considerations ===
Two sets of enzymatic reactions are highly relevant to the efficiency of nitrogen-based fertilizers.
Urease
The first is the hydrolysis (reaction with water) of urea (CO(NH2)2). Many soil bacteria possess the enzyme urease, which catalyzes the conversion of urea to ammonium ion (NH+4) and bicarbonate ion (HCO−3).
Ammonia oxidation
Ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB), such as species of Nitrosomonas, oxidize ammonia (NH3) to nitrite (NO−2), a process termed nitrification. Nitrite-oxidizing bacteria, especially Nitrobacter, oxidize nitrite (NO−2) to nitrate (NO−3), which is extremely soluble and mobile, being leached easily to groundwater then to rivers then to the sea, and is a major cause of eutrophication and algal blooms in rivers, lakes and sea shores.
== Classification ==
Fertilizers are classified in several ways. They are classified according to whether they provide a single nutrient (e.g., K, P, or N), in which case they are classified as straight fertilizers. Multinutrient fertilizers (or complex fertilizers) provide two or more nutrients, for example, N and P combined. Fertilizers are also sometimes classified as inorganic (the topic of most of this article) versus organic. Inorganic fertilizers exclude carbon-containing materials except urea. Organic fertilizers are usually (recycled) plant- or animal-derived matter (e.g. compost, manure, respectively). Inorganic are sometimes called synthetic fertilizers since various chemical treatments are required for their manufacture.
=== Single nutrient ("straight") fertilizers ===
The main nitrogen-based straight fertilizer is ammonia (NH3), ionized in solution as ammonium (NH4+), applied in the form of salts or derivatives, including:
Ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3) with 34-35% nitrogen is widely used.
Urea (CO(NH2)2), with 45-46% nitrogen, another popular source of nitrogen, having the advantage that it is solid and non-explosive, unlike ammonia and ammonium nitrate.
Calcium ammonium nitrate Is a blend of 20-30% limestone CaCO3 or dolomite CaMg(CO3)2 and 70-80% ammonium nitrate with 24-28% nitrogen.
Calcium nitrate with 15.5% nitrogen and 19% calcium, reportedly holding a small share of the nitrogen fertilizer market (4% in 2007).
The main straight phosphate fertilizers are the superphosphates:
Single superphosphate (SSP) consisting of 14–18% P2O5, again in the form of Ca(H2PO4)2, but also phosphogypsum (CaSO4 · 2 H2O).
Triple superphosphate (TSP) typically consists of 44–48% of P2O5 and no gypsum.
A mixture of single superphosphate and triple superphosphate is called double superphosphate. More than 90% of a typical superphosphate fertilizer is water-soluble.
The main potassium-based straight fertilizer is muriate of potash (MOP, 95–99% KCl). It is typically available as 0-0-60 or 0-0-62 fertilizer.
=== Multinutrient fertilizers ===
These fertilizers are common. They consist of two or more nutrient components.
Binary (NP, NK, PK) fertilizers
Major two-component fertilizers provide both nitrogen and phosphorus to the plants. These are called NP fertilizers. The main NP fertilizers are
monoammonium phosphate (MAP) NH4H2PO4. With 11% nitrogen and 48% P2O5.
diammonium phosphate (DAP). (NH4)2HPO4. With 18% nitrogen and 46% P2O5
About 85% of MAP and DAP fertilizers are soluble in water.
NPK fertilizers
NPK fertilizers are three-component fertilizers providing nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. There exist two types of NPK fertilizers: compound and blends. Compound NPK fertilizers contain chemically bound ingredients, while blended NPK fertilizers are physical mixtures of single nutrient components.
NPK rating is a rating system describing the amount of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in a fertilizer. NPK ratings consist of three numbers separated by dashes (e.g., 10-10-10 or 16–4–8) describing the chemical content of fertilizers. The first number represents the percentage of nitrogen in the product; the second number, P2O5; the third, K2O. Fertilizers do not actually contain P2O5 or K2O, but the system is a conventional shorthand for the amount of phosphorus (P) or potassium (K) in a fertilizer. A 50-pound (23 kg) bag of fertilizer labeled 16-4-8 contains 8 lb (3.6 kg) of nitrogen (16% of the 50 pounds), an amount of phosphorus equivalent to that in 2 pounds of P2O5 (4% of 50 pounds), and 4 pounds of K2O (8% of 50 pounds). Most fertilizers are labeled according to this N-P-K convention, although Australian convention, following an N-P-K-S system, adds a fourth number for sulfur, and uses elemental values for all values including P and K.
=== Micronutrients ===
Micronutrients are consumed in smaller quantities and are present in plant tissue on the order of parts-per-million (ppm), ranging from 0.15 to 400 ppm or less than 0.04% dry matter. These elements are often required as co-enzymes for enzymes essential to the plant's metabolism. Because these elements enable catalysts (enzymes), their impact far exceeds their concentration. Typical micronutrients are boron, zinc, molybdenum, iron, and manganese. These elements are provided as water-soluble salts. Iron presents special problems because it converts from soluble (ferrous) to insoluble bio-unavailable (ferric) compounds at moderate soil pH and phosphate concentrations. For this reason, iron is often administered as a chelate complex, e.g., the EDTA or EDDHA derivatives. The micronutrient needs depend on the plant and the environment. For example, sugar beets appear to require boron, and legumes require cobalt, while environmental conditions such as heat or drought make boron less available for plants, causing boron deficiency.
== Production ==
The production of synthetic, or inorganic, fertilizers require prepared chemicals, whereas organic fertilizers are derived from the biological processing of plant and animal remains or excreta (e.g. urine, feces).
=== Nitrogen fertilizers ===
Nitrogen fertilizers are made from ammonia (NH3) produced by the Haber–Bosch process. In this energy-intensive process, natural gas (CH4) usually supplies the hydrogen, and the nitrogen (N2) is derived from the air. This ammonia is used as a feedstock for all other nitrogen fertilizers, such as anhydrous ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3) and urea (CO(NH2)2).
Deposits of sodium nitrate (NaNO3) (Chilean saltpeter) are also found in the Atacama Desert in Chile and were one of the original (1830) nitrogen-rich fertilizers used. It is still mined for fertilizer use. Nitrates are also produced from ammonia by the Ostwald process.
=== Phosphate fertilizers ===
Phosphate fertilizers are obtained by extraction from phosphate rock, which contains two principal phosphorus-containing minerals, fluorapatite Ca5(PO4)3F (CFA) and hydroxyapatite Ca5(PO4)3OH. Billions of kg of phosphate rock are mined annually, but the size and quality of the remaining ore is decreasing. These minerals are converted into water-soluble phosphate salts by treatment with acids. The large production of sulfuric acid is primarily motivated by this application. In the nitrophosphate process or Odda process (invented in 1927), phosphate rock with up to a 20% phosphorus (P) content is dissolved with nitric acid (HNO3) to produce a mixture of phosphoric acid (H3PO4) and calcium nitrate (Ca(NO3)2). This mixture can be combined with a potassium fertilizer to produce a compound fertilizer with the three macronutrients N, P and K in easily dissolved form.
=== Potassium fertilizers ===
Potash is a mixture of potassium minerals used to make potassium (chemical symbol: K) fertilizers. Potash is soluble in water, so the main effort in producing this nutrient from the ore involves some purification steps, e.g., to remove sodium chloride (NaCl) (common salt). Sometimes potash is referred to as K2O, as a matter of convenience to those describing the potassium content. In fact, potash fertilizers are usually potassium chloride, potassium sulfate, potassium carbonate, or potassium nitrate.
=== NPK fertilizers ===
There are three major routes for manufacturing NPK fertilizers (named for their main ingredients: nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K)):
Bulk blending. The individual fertilizers are combined in the desired nutrient ratio.
The wet process is based on chemical reactions between liquid raw materials phosphoric acid, sulfuric acid, ammonia) and solid raw materials (such as potassium chloride).
The nitrophosphate process.
Step 1. Nitrophosphates are made by acidiculating phosphate rock with nitric acid.
Nitric acid + Phosphate rock → Phosphoric acid + Calcium sulphate + hexafluorosilicic acid.
Ca5F(PO4)3 + 10 HNO3 →6 H3PO4 + 5 Ca(NO3)2 + HF
6 HF + SiO2 →H2SiF6 + 2 H2O
Step 2. Removal of Calcium Nitrate. It is important to remove the calcium nitrate because calcium nitrate is extremely hygroscopic.
Method 1.(Odda process) Calcium nitrate crystals are removed by centrifugation.
Method 2. Sulfonitric Process Ca(NO3)2 + H2SO4 + 2NH3 → CaSO4 + 2NH4NO3
Method 3.Phosphonitric Process Ca(NO3)2 + H3PO4 + 2NH3 → CaHPO4 + 2NH4NO3
Method 4.Carbonitric Process Ca(NO3)2 + CO2 + H2O + 2NH3 → CaCO3 + 2NH4NO3
=== Organic fertilizers ===
Organic fertilizers can describe those fertilizers with a biological origin, i.e. derived from living or formerly living materials. Organic fertilizers can also describe commercially available and frequently packaged products that strive to follow the expectations and restrictions adopted by organic farming and environmentally friendly gardening, i.e. related systems of food and plant production that significantly limit or strictly avoid the use of synthetic fertilizers and pesticides. The organic fertilizer products typically contain both some organic materials as well as acceptable additives such as nutritive rock powders, ground seashells (crab, oyster, etc.), other prepared products such as seed meal or kelp, and cultivated microorganisms and derivatives.
Fertilizers of an organic origin (the first definition) include animal wastes, plant wastes from agriculture, seaweed, compost, and treated sewage sludge (biosolids). Beyond manures, animal sources can include products from animal slaughters: bloodmeal, bone meal, feather meal, hides, hoofs, and horns all are typical components. Organically derived materials available to industry such as sewage sludge may not be acceptable components of organic farming and gardening, because of factors ranging from residual contaminants to public perception. No matter the definition nor composition, most of these products contain less-concentrated nutrients, and the nutrients are not as easily quantified. They can offer soil-building advantages as well as be appealing to those who are trying to farm or garden more naturally.
In terms of volume, peat is the most widely used packaged organic soil amendment. It is an immature form of coal which improves soil aeration and moisture and thus soil biological activity but confers no direct nutritional value to the plants. It is therefore not a fertilizer as defined in the beginning of the article, but rather an amendment. Coir (derived from coconut husks), bark, and sawdust are mainly applied as mulch and protects the soil from desiccation while preventing the development of weeds and improving soil structure, but do not confer any nutritional value to the soil. Some organic additives can even have a reverse effect on nutrients. Fresh sawdust can consume soil nutrients as it breaks down and is colonized by wood-decay fungi, causing nitrogen deficiency (nitrogen drawdown) in the absence of nutrient addition. However, this property can be used to capture excess mineral nitrogen. These same organic soil texturizers (as well as compost, etc.) may increase the availability of nutrients through improved cation-exchange capacity, or through increased growth of microorganisms that in turn increase availability of certain plant nutrients. True organic fertilizers such as composts and manures may be distributed locally without going into industry production, making actual consumption more difficult to quantify.
== Fertilizer consumption ==
China has become the largest producer and consumer of nitrogen fertilizers while Africa has little reliance on nitrogen fertilizers. Agricultural and chemical minerals are very important in industrial use of fertilizers, which is valued at approximately $200 billion. Nitrogen has a significant impact in the global mineral use, followed by potash and phosphate. The production of nitrogen has drastically increased since the 1960s. Phosphate and potash have increased in price since the 1960s, which is larger than the consumer price index. Potash is produced in Canada, Russia and Belarus, together making up over half of the world production. Potash production in Canada rose in 2017 and 2018 by 18.6%. Conservative estimates report 30 to 50% of crop yields are attributed to natural or synthetic commercial fertilizers. Fertilizer consumption has surpassed the amount of farmland in the United States.
Data on the fertilizer consumption per hectare arable land in 2012 are published by The World Bank. The diagram below shows fertilizer consumption by the European Union (EU) countries as kilograms per hectare (pounds per acre). The total consumption of fertilizer in the EU reached a peak of 11.6 million tons in 2017 but decreased steadily since that time, down to 9.3 million tons in 2023 for 157 million hectares arable land area in 2020, 1.5 million hectares less than in 2010. This figure equates to 70 kg of fertilizers consumed per ha arable land on average by the EU countries in 2020.
Total agricultural use of inorganic fertilizers, expressed as the sum of the three nutrients nitrogen (N), phosphorus (expressed as P2 O5 ) and potassium (expressed as K2 O), was 190 million tonnes in 2023, up 1% compared with 2022. 112 million tonnes of nitrogen (58% of the total), 41 million tonnes of phosphorus (21% ) and 38 million tonnes of potassium (20% ). Overall fertilizer use in 2023 was 55 million tonnes (41%) higher than in 2000 (38% higher for nitrogen, 26% higher for phosphorus and 73% higher for potassium). Asia represented 56% of world total agricultural use of inorganic fertilizers in 2023, followed by the Americas (27% ), Europe (11%), Africa (4%) and Oceania (2%).
== Application ==
Fertilizers are commonly used for growing all crops, with application rates depending on soil fertility, usually as measured by a soil test and according to the particular crop. Legumes, for example, fix nitrogen from the atmosphere and generally do not require nitrogen fertilizer, hence their promising use for ensuring agriculture sustainability.
=== Timing and amount of application ===
The timing of application of fertilizers (here only mineral fertilizers will be considered) is a function of crop requirements, weather condition and market opportunities. It varies in nature and amount according to the type of agriculture (e.g. intensive farming versus conservation agriculture, grassland versus arable land), and the presence or absence of signs of nutrient deficiencies. Timing fertilization with peak nutrient uptake demand is essential for optimizing both yield and quality. In general, nutrient uptake rates are highest from early to midgrowing season, which is why fertilization near the time of seeding is generally very effective. With fall-planted grains (e.g. winter wheat), fall N fertilization followed by spring topdressing is likely the best combination of fertilization practices to optimize yield. The application of a soluble mineral fertilizer (e.g. ammonium nitrate) is avoided during heavy rainfall because most of it would be lost for the crop and would rapidly pollute the aquifer. In conservation agriculture (including no-till farming, permaculture) as well as other non-organic alternatives to intensive farming (e.g. smallholding agriculture) the application of mineral fertilizers is reduced to the strict requirements of the cultivated plants and sometimes is quite unnecessary.
After harvest of a main crop (e.g. wheat, maize, potatoes) a catch crop can be sown, using plant species with a rapid growth rate and high demand of nitrogen (e.g. white mustard). This allows excess nitrogen, in particular the very mobile nitrate anion, to be taken up and transformed in plant proteins before contaminating the groundwater, and the associated geochemical processes, which would rapidly occur in the absence of plant cover. The catch crop is further buried, allowing its transformation in humus in which nitrogen is fixed according to various stable chemical bonds.
=== Liquid vs solid ===
Fertilizers are applied to crops both as solids and as liquid. About 90% of fertilizers are applied as solids. The most widely used solid inorganic fertilizers are urea, diammonium phosphate and potassium chloride. Solid fertilizer is typically granulated or powdered. Often solids are available as prills, a solid globule. Liquid fertilizers comprise aqueous solutions of ammonia, aqueous solutions of ammonium nitrate or urea. These concentrated products may be diluted with water to form a concentrated liquid fertilizer (e.g., UAN). Advantages of liquid fertilizer are its more rapid effect and easier coverage. The addition of fertilizer to irrigation water is called fertigation. Granulated fertilizers are more economical to ship and store, not to mention easier to apply.
=== Slow- and controlled-release fertilizers ===
A controlled-release fertiliser (CRF) is a granulated fertiliser that releases nutrients gradually into the soil (i.e., with a controlled release period). Controlled-release fertilizer is also known as controlled-availability fertilizer, delayed-release fertilizer, metered-release fertilizer, or slow-acting fertilizer. Usually slow- and controlled-release fertilizers refer to nitrogen-based fertilizers, e.g. ureaform, needing degradation by a wide spectrum of soil organisms before nitrogen could be liberated as nitrate. Slow-release fertilizers (SRF) and controlled-release fertilizers (CRF) offer various benefits over conventional ones, ensuring sustainability in fertilizing practice.
=== Foliar application ===
Foliar fertilizers are applied directly to leaves. They can reduce the total amounts of fertilizer applied and achieve high fertilizer efficiency. This method is almost invariably used to apply water-soluble straight nitrogen fertilizers and used especially for high-value crops such as fruits. Urea is the most common foliar fertilizer. However, chelation of the foliar-applied nutrient is recommended for improving absorption and migration of the targeted nutrient and thereby avoiding loss to the soil and the groundwater.
=== Chemicals that affect nitrogen uptake ===
Various chemicals are used to enhance the efficiency of nitrogen-based fertilizers. In this way farmers can limit the polluting effects of nitrogen run-off. Nitrification inhibitors (also known as nitrogen stabilizers) suppress the conversion of ammonia into nitrate, an anion that is more prone to leaching. 1-Carbamoyl-3-methylpyrazole (CMP), dicyandiamide, nitrapyrin (2-chloro-6-trichloromethylpyridine) and 3,4-dimethylpyrazole phosphate (DMPP) are popular. Urease inhibitors are used to slow the hydrolytic conversion of urea into ammonia catalyzed by ureases, ammonia being prone to evaporation as well as nitrification. A popular inhibitor of ureases is N-(n-butyl)thiophosphoric triamide (NBPT).
=== Overfertilization ===
Careful use of fertilization technologies is important because excess nutrients can be detrimental to the cultivated plant. Fertilizer burn can occur when too much fertilizer is applied, resulting in damage or even death of the plant. Fertilizers vary in their tendency to burn roughly in accordance with their salt index.
== Environmental effects ==
Synthetic fertilizers used in agriculture have wide-reaching environmental consequences.
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on Climate Change and Land, production of these fertilizers and associated land use practices are drivers of global warming. The use of fertilizer has also led to a number of direct environmental consequences: agricultural runoff which leads to downstream effects like ocean dead zones and waterway contamination, soil microbiome degradation, and accumulation of toxic compounds in ecosystems. Indirect environmental impacts include: N-crop-pest cascades, increased greenhouse gas emissions and environmental impacts of fracking for the natural gas used in the Haber process, the agricultural boom which is partially responsible for the rapid growth in human population and large-scale industrial agricultural practices associated with it causing pressure on biodiversity, habitat destruction and fragmentation, and agricultural soil loss.
In order to mitigate environmental and food security concerns, the international community has included food systems in Sustainable Development Goal 2 which focuses on creating a climate-friendly and sustainable food production system. Most policy and regulatory approaches to address these issues focus on pivoting agricultural practices towards sustainable or regenerative agricultural practices: these use less synthetic fertilizers (for example sustainable agriculture), better soil management (for example no-till agriculture) and more organic fertilizers (for example organic farming, conservation agriculture, biodynamic agriculture).
For each ton of phosphoric acid produced by the processing of phosphate rock, five tons of waste are generated. This waste takes the form of impure, useless, radioactive solid called phosphogypsum. Estimates range from 100,000,000 and 280,000,000 tons of phosphogypsum waste produced annually worldwide.
=== Water ===
Phosphorus and nitrogen fertilizers can affect soil, surface water, and groundwater due to the dispersion of minerals into waterways under high rainfall, snowmelt and can leach into groundwater over time. Agricultural run-off is a major contributor to the eutrophication of freshwater bodies. For example, in the US, about half of all the lakes surveyed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) were eutrophic in 2007 with a further alarming increase to 80 per cent in 2012. The main contributor to eutrophication is phosphate, which is normally a limiting nutrient, besides nitrogen; high P concentrations promote the growth of cyanobacteria and algae, the demise of which consumes oxygen. Cyanobacteria blooms ('algal blooms') can also produce harmful toxins that can accumulate in the food chain, and can be harmful to humans. Fertilizer run-off can be reduced by using weather-optimized fertilization strategies.
The nitrogen-rich compounds found in fertilizer runoff are the primary cause of serious oxygen depletion in many parts of oceans, especially in coastal zones, lakes and rivers. The resulting lack of dissolved oxygen greatly reduces the ability of these areas to sustain oceanic fauna. The number of oceanic dead zones near inhabited coastlines is increasing.
As of 2006, the application of nitrogen fertilizer is being increasingly controlled in northwestern Europe and the United States. In cases where eutrophication can be reversed, it may nevertheless take decades and need significant soil management before the accumulated nitrates in groundwater can be broken down by natural denitrification.
==== Nitrate pollution ====
Only a fraction of the nitrogen-based fertilizers is converted to plant matter. The remainder accumulates in the soil or is lost as run-off. High application rates of nitrogen-containing fertilizers combined with the high water solubility of nitrate leads to increased runoff into surface water as well as leaching into groundwater, thereby causing groundwater pollution. The excessive use of nitrogen-containing fertilizers (be they synthetic or natural) is particularly damaging, as much of the nitrogen that is not taken up by plants is transformed into nitrate which is easily leached.
Nitrate levels above 10 mg/L (10 ppm) in groundwater can cause 'blue baby syndrome' (acquired methemoglobinemia). The nutrients, especially nitrates, in fertilizers can cause problems for natural habitats and for human health if they are washed off into watercourses or leached through the soil into groundwater. Run-off can lead to fertilizing algal blooms that use up all the oxygen and leave huge "dead zones" behind where other fish and aquatic life can not live.
=== Soil ===
==== Acidification ====
Soil acidification refers to the process by which the pH level of soil becomes more acidic over time. Soil pH is a measure of the soil's acidity or alkalinity and is determined on a scale from 0 to 14, with 7 being neutral. A pH value below 7 indicates acidic soil, while a pH value above 7 indicates alkaline or basic soil. Soil acidification is a significant concern in agriculture and horticulture, leading to cation leaching, unstable soil aggregate structure, metal toxicity, decreased nutrient availability, and thus affecting soil biological properties and plant performances.
Nitrogen-containing fertilizers release ammonium or nitrate ions, which can acidify the soil as they undergo biochemical reactions. When nitrogen-containing fertilizers, whether mineral or organic, are added to the soil, they increase the concentration of hydrogen ions (H+) in the soil solution, which lowers the pH of the soil. This may lead to decrease in nutrient availability which may be offset by liming.
Soil acidification occurs also through acid rain, a man-induced concern despite severe measures to suppress or mitigate industrial gas emissions since the 1970s. Among reported causes of acid rain, nitrogen fertilizers (whether mineral or organic), and the subsequent emissions of nitrous and nitric oxides are prominent in regions of intensive agriculture. The mechanisms are complex, involving ammonia volatilization from manure (whether stored or spread) or urea and direct redeposition followed by nitrification in the soil or previous oxidation to nitrogen oxides in the atmosphere before redeposition as nitric acid.
==== Accumulation of toxic elements ====
===== Cadmium =====
The concentration of cadmium in phosphorus-containing fertilizers varies considerably and can be problematic. For example, mono-ammonium phosphate fertilizer may have a cadmium content of as low as 0.14 mg/kg or as high as 50.9 mg/kg. The phosphate rock used in their manufacture can contain as much as 188 mg/kg cadmium Examples are deposits on Nauru and the Christmas Islands. Continuous use of high-cadmium fertilizer can contaminate soils and plants. Limits to the cadmium content of phosphate fertilizers have been considered by the European Commission. Producers of phosphorus-containing fertilizers now select phosphate rock based on the cadmium content.
===== Fluoride =====
Phosphate rocks contain high levels of fluoride in the form of fluorapatite. Consequently, the widespread use of phosphate fertilizers has increased soil fluoride concentrations. It has been found that food contamination from fertilizer is of little concern as plants accumulate little fluoride from the soil; of greater concern is the possibility of fluoride toxicity to livestock that ingest contaminated soil. Also of possible concern are the effects of fluoride on soil microorganisms.
===== Radioactive elements =====
The radioactive content of the fertilizers varies considerably and depends both on their concentrations in the parent mineral and on the fertilizer production process. Uranium-238 concentrations can range from 7 to 100 pCi/g (picocuries per gram) in phosphate rock and from 1 to 67 pCi/g in phosphate fertilizers. Where high annual rates of phosphorus fertilizer are used, this can result in uranium-238 concentrations in soils and drainage waters that are several times greater than are normally present. However, the impact of these increases on the risk to human health from radionuclidic contamination of foods is very small (less than 0.05 mSv/y).
===== Other metals =====
Steel industry wastes such as steel slag are often recycled as a soil amendment or for the production of fertilizers due to their high Ca and Mg content and various trace elements necessary for plant growth. However, they can also include toxic metals. Among them are arsenic, cadmium, chromium, and nickel, while steel slag amendment rather contribute to immobilize lead in the soil and thus to decrease its toxicity to the cultivated plant. The most common toxic elements in this type of fertilizer are mercury, lead, and arsenic. Given the high cost of removing potentially harmful properties from steel slags, a better solution is to immobilize them. The incorporation of biochar to steel slag make even the mixture a good amendement for the (passivation) of heavy metals in agricultural soil. Highly pure fertilizers are widely available and perhaps best known as the highly water-soluble fertilizers containing blue dyes used around households, such as Miracle-Gro. These highly water-soluble fertilizers are used in the plant nursery business and are available in larger packages at significantly less cost than retail quantities. Some inexpensive retail granular garden fertilizers are made with high purity ingredients.
==== Trace mineral depletion ====
Attention has been addressed to the decreasing concentrations of micronutrients such as iron, zinc, copper and magnesium in many foods over the last 50–60 years. Intensive farming practices, including the use of synthetic fertilizers, are frequently suggested as reasons for these declines and organic farming is often suggested as a solution. Although improved crop yields resulting from NPK fertilizers are known to dilute the concentrations of other nutrients in plants, much of the measured decline can be attributed to the use of progressively higher-yielding crop varieties that produce foods with lower mineral concentrations than their less-productive ancestors. It is, therefore, unlikely that organic farming or reduced use of fertilizers (e.g. conservation agriculture) will solve the problem; foods with high nutrient density are posited to be achieved using older, lower-yielding varieties or the development of new high-yield, nutrient-dense varieties.
Fertilizers are, in fact, more likely to solve trace mineral deficiency problems than cause them: in Western Australia deficiencies of zinc, copper, manganese, iron and molybdenum were identified as limiting the growth of broad-acre crops and pastures in the 1940s and 1950s. Soils in Western Australia are very old, highly weathered and deficient in many of the major nutrients and trace elements. Since this time these trace elements are routinely added to fertilizers used in agriculture in this state. Many other soils around the world are deficient in zinc, leading to deficiency in both plants and humans, and zinc fertilizers are widely used to solve this problem.
==== Changes in soil biology ====
High levels of fertilizer may cause the breakdown of the symbiotic relationships between plant roots and mycorrhizal fungi, in particular when in excess of plant requirements. It is still debated whether and how fertilizers affect soil animals. Both organic and organic–mineral fertilizers increase the abundance of soil fauna whereas mineral fertilizers had no such effect, with idiosyncratic responses of soil animal groups masking overall effects. Chemical fertilizers stimulates the growth of microbial populations but did not change their richness and diversity, while decreases in enzymatic activity have been registered.
The combination of soil acidification and high nitrogen content was probably unknown to most soil organisms before the advent of industrial agriculture. More generally, soils are either acidic and nutrient-poor, or neutral to basic and nutrient-rich (nitrogen included), in relation to the pH-dependent capacity of clay minerals to hold nutrients. This unexpected combination of excess nutrient availability and acid stress causes a depletion in the sustainability of animal and microbial communities by weakening the linkages between aboveground and belowground components of agroecosystems. Other ecosystems are also affected by nitrogen-enriched acid rains originationg from intensive agricultural practices. Sphagnum bogs are now shifting from carbon sinks (thanks to the accumulation of recalcitrant sphagnum litter and anoxic conditions) to carbon sources under the influence of nitrogen deposition and subsequent stimulation of decomposer activity. Other nutrient-poor ecosystems are also strongly affected, such as heathlands, with a surprising combination of higher soil organic matter accumulation and higher soil enzyme activity.
Two types of agricultural management practices include organic farming and conventional agriculture. The former encourages soil fertility using local resources to maximize efficiency. Organic agriculture avoids synthetic agrochemicals. Conventional agriculture uses all the components that organic agriculture does not use.
The excess use of organic amendments (e.g. pig slurry) may have detrimental effects on water quality through contamination of the aquifer and subsequent eutrophication of the water bodies it feds. This is a societal concern in areas where pig farming conflicts with environmental protection.
=== Fossil fuel consumption and sustainability ===
Most synthetic fertilizer is fed from fossil fuel, using fossil energy and methane for producing hydrogen used in the synthesis of ammonia by the Haber process, as well as various chemical reactions used in the synthesis of most fertilizers (e.g. urea, ammonium nitrate, superphosphate). Some alternatives have been proposed for the production of hydrogen, such as solar energy, waste treatment, or electrolysis.
=== Contribution to the greenhouse effect ===
The amount of greenhouse gases carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide produced during the manufacture and use of nitrogen fertilizer is estimated as around 5% of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. One third is produced during the production and two thirds during the use of fertilizers. Nitrate is converted by soil bacteria to nitrous oxide, a greenhouse gas. Nitrous oxide emissions by humans, most of which are from fertilizer, between 2007 and 2016 were estimated at 700 million tons of CO2 equivalent.
Nitrogen fertilizer was used at a rate of about 110 million tons (of N) per year in 2012. Nitrous oxide (N2O) is the third most important greenhouse gas after carbon dioxide and methane. It has 296 times greater greenhouse effect per ton than carbon dioxide. The 2025 emissions contributed the equivalent of 700 megatons of CO2 to the atmosphere. It also contributes to stratospheric ozone depletion. Altering processes and procedures could reduce these emissions.
Methane emissions from crop fields (notably rice paddy fields) are increased by the application of ammonium-based fertilizers. These emissions contribute to global climate change as methane is a potent greenhouse gas.
== Policy ==
=== Regulation ===
In Europe, problems with high nitrate concentrations in runoff are being addressed by the European Union's Nitrates Directive. Within Britain, farmers are encouraged to manage their land more sustainably in 'catchment-sensitive farming'. In the US, high concentrations of nitrate and phosphorus in runoff and drainage water are classified as nonpoint source pollutants due to their diffuse origin; this pollution is regulated at the state level. Oregon and Washington, both in the United States, have fertilizer registration programs with on-line databases listing chemical analyses of fertilizers. Carbon emission trading and eco-tariffs affect the production and price of fertilizer.
=== Subsidies ===
In China, regulations have been implemented to control the use of N fertilizers in farming. In 2008, Chinese governments began to partially withdraw fertilizer subsidies, including subsidies to fertilizer transportation and to electricity and natural gas use in the industry. In consequence, the price of fertilizer has gone up and large-scale farms have begun to use less fertilizer. If large-scale farms keep reducing their use of fertilizer subsidies, they have no choice but to optimize the fertilizer they have which would therefore gain an increase in both grain yield and profit.
In March 2022, the United States Department of Agriculture announced a new $250M grant to promote American fertilizer production. Part of the Commodity Credit Corporation, the grant program will support fertilizer production that is independent of dominant fertilizer suppliers, made in America, and utilizing innovative production techniques to jumpstart future competition.
In the European Union The Russo-Ukrainian war and the subsequent strong increase in energy and mineral fertiliser prices highlighted the need for greater autonomy and efficiency in the production and use of fertilisers. The amended Temporary Crisis and Transition Framework for State Aid enabled EU countries to provide specific support to farmers and fertiliser producers. Funds generated by measures such as the cap on the market revenues of certain electricity generators and the solidarity contribution can also be used, subject to the applicable conditions, for purposes of national support schemes.
== See also ==
Agroecology
Circulus (theory)
Fertigation
History of organic farming
Milorganite
Leaf Color Chart
Phosphogypsum
Peak phosphorus
Soil defertilisation
Seaweed fertilizer
== Sources ==
== References ==
Gilbeart H. Collings, Commercial Fertilizers, 1938
Malcolm Vickar, Fertilizer technology and usage, Wisconsin, 1963
McKetta & Cunningham, Encyclopedia of Chemical Processing and Design,1984
Ullman's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 1987, volume A10, page 323–421.
Kirk Otmer, Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, 1993, volume 10, page 433–514.
All about fertilizer for medicinal plants
=== Cited sources ===
== External links ==
Nitrogen for Feeding Our Food, Its Earthly Origin, Haber Process Archived 11 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine
International Fertilizer Industry Association (IFA)
Agriculture Guide, Complete Guide to Fertilizers and Fertilization (archived 6 October 2011)
Nitrogen-Phosphorus-Potassium Values of Organic Fertilizers. Archived 26 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

Wheat is a group of wild and domesticated grasses of the genus Triticum (). As cereals, they are cultivated for their grains, which are staple foods around the world. Well-known wheat species and hybrids include the most widely grown common wheat (T. aestivum), spelt, durum, emmer, einkorn, and Khorasan or Kamut. The archaeological record suggests that wheat was first cultivated in the regions of the Fertile Crescent around 9600 BC.
Wheat is grown on a larger area of land than any other food crop (219.5 million hectares or 542 million acres in 2024). World trade in wheat is greater than that of all other crops combined. In 2024, world wheat production was 799 million tonnes (881 million short tons), making it the second most-produced cereal after maize (known as corn in North America and Australia). Since 1960, world production of wheat and other grain crops has tripled and is expected to grow further through the middle of the 21st century. Global demand for wheat is increasing because of the usefulness of gluten to the food industry.
Wheat is an important source of carbohydrates. Globally, it is the leading source of vegetable proteins in human food, having a protein content of about 13%, which is relatively high compared to other major cereals but relatively low in protein quality (supplying essential amino acids). When eaten as the whole grain, wheat is a source of multiple nutrients and dietary fibre. In a small part of the general population, gluten – which comprises most of the protein in wheat – can trigger coeliac disease, noncoeliac gluten sensitivity, gluten ataxia, and dermatitis herpetiformis.
== Description ==
Wheat is a stout grass of medium to tall height. Its stem is jointed and usually hollow, forming a straw. There can be many stems on one plant. It has long narrow leaves, their bases sheathing the stem, one above each joint. At the top of the stem is the flower head, containing some 20 to 100 flowers. Each flower contains both male and female parts. The flowers are wind-pollinated, with over 99% of pollination events being self-pollinations and the rest cross-pollinations. The flower is housed in a pair of small leaflike glumes. The two (male) stamens and (female) stigmas protrude outside the glumes. The flowers are grouped into spikelets, each with between two and six flowers. Each fertilised carpel develops into a wheat grain or berry; botanically a caryopsis fruit, it is often called a seed. The grains ripen to a golden yellow; a head of grain is called an ear.
Leaves emerge from the shoot apical meristem in a telescoping fashion until the transition to reproduction i.e. flowering. The last leaf produced by a wheat plant is known as the flag leaf. It is denser and has a higher photosynthetic rate than other leaves, to supply carbohydrate to the developing ear. In temperate countries the flag leaf, along with the second and third highest leaves on the plant, supply the majority of carbohydrate in the grain; their condition is critical for crop yield. Wheat is unusual in having more stomata on the upper (adaxial) side of the leaf, than on the under (abaxial) side. It has been theorised that this might be an effect of having been cultivated longer than any other plant. Winter wheat generally produces up to 15 leaves per shoot, and spring wheat up to 9; winter crops may have up to 35 tillers (shoots) per plant (depending on cultivar).
Wheat roots are among the deepest of arable crops, extending as far down as 2 metres (6 ft 7 in). While the roots of a wheat plant are growing, the plant accumulates an energy store in its stem, in the form of fructans, which helps the plant to yield under drought and disease pressure, but there is a trade-off between root growth and stem non-structural carbohydrate reserves. Root growth is likely to be prioritised in drought-adapted crops, while stem non-structural carbohydrate is prioritised in varieties developed for countries where disease is a bigger issue.
Depending on variety, wheat may be awned or not. Producing awns incurs a cost in grain number, but wheat awns photosynthesise more efficiently than leaves with regards to water usage, so awns are much more frequent in varieties of wheat grown in hot drought-prone countries than those in temperate countries. For this reason, awned varieties could become more widespread due to climate change. In Europe, wheat's climate resilience has declined.
== History ==
=== Domestication ===
Hunter-gatherers in West Asia harvested wild wheats for thousands of years before they were domesticated, perhaps as early as 21,000 BC, but they formed a minor component of their diets. In this phase of pre-domestication cultivation, early cultivars were spread around the region and slowly developed the traits that came to characterise their domesticated forms.
Repeated harvesting and sowing of the grains of wild grasses led to the creation of domestic strains, as mutant forms ('sports') of wheat were more amenable to cultivation. In domesticated wheat, grains are larger, and the seeds (inside the spikelets) remain attached to the ear by a toughened rachis during harvesting. In wild strains, a more fragile rachis allows the ear to shatter easily, dispersing the spikelets. Selection for larger grains and non-shattering heads by farmers might not have been deliberately intended, but simply have occurred because these traits made gathering the seeds easier; nevertheless such 'incidental' selection was an important part of crop domestication. As the traits that improve wheat as a food source involve the loss of the plant's natural seed dispersal mechanisms, highly domesticated strains of wheat cannot survive in the wild.
Wild einkorn wheat (T. monococcum subsp. boeoticum) grows across Southwest Asia in open parkland and steppe environments. It comprises three distinct races, only one of which, native to Southeast Anatolia, was domesticated. The main feature that distinguishes domestic einkorn from wild is that its ears do not shatter without pressure, making it dependent on humans for dispersal and reproduction. It also tends to have wider grains. Wild einkorn was collected at sites such as Tell Abu Hureyra (c. 10,700–9000 BC) and Mureybet (c. 9800–9300 BC), but the earliest archaeological evidence for the domestic form comes after c. 8800 BC in southern Turkey, at Çayönü, Cafer Höyük, and possibly Nevalı Çori. Genetic evidence indicates that it was domesticated in multiple places independently.
Wild emmer wheat (T. turgidum subsp. dicoccoides) is less widespread than einkorn, favouring the rocky basaltic and limestone soils found in the Hilly Flanks of the Fertile Crescent. It is more diverse, with domesticated varieties falling into two major groups: hulled or non-shattering, in which threshing separates the whole spikelet; and free-threshing, where the individual grains are separated. Both varieties probably existed in prehistory, but over time free-threshing cultivars became more common. Wild emmer was first cultivated in the southern Levant, as early as 9600 BC. Genetic studies have found that, like einkorn, it was domesticated in southeastern Anatolia, but only once. The earliest secure archaeological evidence for domestic emmer comes from Çayönü, c. 8300–7600 BC, where distinctive scars on the spikelets indicated that they came from a hulled domestic variety. Slightly earlier finds have been reported from Tell Aswad in Syria, c. 8500–8200 BC, but these were identified using a less reliable method based on grain size.
=== Early farming ===
Einkorn and emmer are considered two of the founder crops cultivated by the first farming societies in Neolithic West Asia. These communities also cultivated naked wheats (T. aestivum and T. durum) and a now-extinct domesticated form of Zanduri wheat (T. timopheevii), as well as a wide variety of other cereal and non-cereal crops. Wheat was relatively uncommon for the first thousand years of the Neolithic (when barley predominated), but became a staple after around 8500 BC. Early wheat cultivation did not demand much labour. Initially, farmers took advantage of wheat's ability to establish itself in annual grasslands by enclosing fields against grazing animals and re-sowing stands after they had been harvested, without the need to systematically remove vegetation or till the soil. They may also have exploited natural wetlands and floodplains to practice décrue farming, sowing seeds in the soil left behind by receding floodwater. It was harvested with stone-bladed sickles. The ease of storing wheat and other cereals led farming households to become gradually more reliant on it over time, especially after they developed individual storage facilities that were large enough to hold more than a year's supply.
Wheat grain was stored after threshing, with the chaff removed. It was then processed into flour using ground stone mortars. A bread-like food with ground einkorn and the tubers of the tuberous bulrush Bolboschoenus glaucus was made as early as 12,400 BC. At Çatalhöyük (c. 7100–6000 BC), both wholegrain wheat and flour was used to prepare bread, porridge and gruel. Apart from food, wheat may also have been important to Neolithic societies as a source of straw, which could be used for fuel, wicker-making, or wattle and daub construction.
=== Spread ===
Domestic wheat was quickly spread to regions where its wild ancestors did not grow naturally. Emmer was introduced to Cyprus as early as 8600 BC and einkorn c. 7500 BC; emmer reached Greece by 6500 BC, Egypt shortly after 6000 BC, and Germany and Spain by 5000 BC. "The early Egyptians were developers of bread and the use of the oven and developed baking into one of the first large-scale food production industries." By 4000 BC, wheat had reached the British Isles and Scandinavia. Wheat was also cultivated in India around 3500 BC. Wheat likely appeared in China's lower Yellow River around 2600 BC.
The oldest evidence for hexaploid wheat is through DNA analysis of wheat seeds from around 6400–6200 BC at Çatalhöyük. As of 2023, the earliest known wheat with sufficient gluten for yeasted breads is from a granary at Assiros in Macedonia dated to 1350 BC. Wheat continued to spread across Europe and to the Americas in the Columbian exchange. In the British Isles, wheat straw (thatch) was used for roofing in the Bronze Age, remaining in common use until the late 19th century. White wheat bread was historically a high status food, but during the nineteenth century it became in Britain an item of mass consumption, displacing oats, barley and rye from diets in the North of the country. After 1860, the expansion of wheat production in the United States flooded the world market, lowering prices by 40%, and made a major contribution to the nutritional welfare of the poor.
== Evolution ==
=== Phylogeny ===
Some wheat species are diploid, with two sets of chromosomes, but many are stable polyploids, with four sets (tetraploid) or six (hexaploid). Einkorn is diploid (AA, two complements of seven chromosomes, 2n=14). Most tetraploid wheats (e.g. emmer and durum wheat) are derived from wild emmer. Wild emmer is itself the result of a hybridisation between two diploid wild grasses, T. urartu and a wild goatgrass such as Ae. speltoides. The hybridisation that formed wild emmer (AABB, four complements of seven chromosomes in two groups, 4n=28) occurred in the wild, long before domestication, and was driven by natural selection. Hexaploid wheats evolved in farmers' fields as wild emmer hybridised with another goatgrass, Ae. tauschii, to make the hexaploid wheats including bread wheat. The origin of the D genome from Ae. tauschii has been established from molecular analysis of the genomes of many hexaploid wheat varieties.
A 2007 molecular phylogeny of the wheats gives the following not fully-resolved cladogram of major cultivated species; the large amount of hybridisation makes resolution difficult. Markings like "6N" indicate the polyploidy of each species:
=== Taxonomy ===
During 10,000 years of cultivation, numerous forms of wheat, many of them hybrids, have developed under a combination of artificial and natural selection. This complexity and diversity of status has led to much confusion in the naming of wheats.
The wild species of wheat, along with the domesticated varieties einkorn, emmer and spelt, have hulls. This more primitive morphology (in evolutionary terms) consists of toughened glumes that tightly enclose the grains, and (in domesticated wheats) a semi-brittle rachis that breaks easily on threshing. The result is that when threshed, the wheat ear breaks up into spikelets. To obtain the grain, further processing, such as milling or pounding, is needed to remove the hulls or husks. Hulled wheats are often stored as spikelets because the toughened glumes give good protection against pests of stored grain. In free-threshing (or naked) forms, such as durum wheat and common wheat, the glumes are fragile and the rachis tough. On threshing, the chaff breaks up, releasing the grains.
== As a food ==
=== Grain classes ===
Classification of wheat greatly varies by the producing country.
Argentina's grain classes were formerly related to the production region or port of shipment: Rosafe (grown in Santa Fe province, shipped through Rosario), Bahia Blanca (grown in Buenos Aires and La Pampa provinces and shipped through Bahia Blanca), Buenos Aires (shipped through the port of Buenos Aires). While mostly similar to the US Hard Red Spring wheat, the classification caused inconsistencies, so Argentina introduced three new classes of wheat, with all names using a prefix Trigo Dura Argentina (TDA) and a number.
The grain classification in Australia is within the purview of its National Pool Classification Panel. Australia chose to measure the protein content at 11% moisture basis.
The decisions on the wheat classification in Canada are coordinated by the Variety Registration Office of the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. As in the US system, the eight classes in Western Canada and six classes in Eastern Canada are based on colour, season, and hardness. Uniquely, Canada requires that the varieties should allow for purely visual identification.
The classes used in the United States are named by colour, season, and hardness.
=== Food value and uses ===
Wheat is a staple cereal worldwide. Raw wheat berries can be ground into flour or, using hard durum wheat only, can be ground into semolina; germinated and dried creating malt; crushed or cut into cracked wheat; parboiled (or steamed), dried, and de-branned into groats, then crushed into bulgur. If the raw wheat is broken into parts at the mill, the outer husk or bran is removed. Wheat is a major ingredient in baked foods, such as bread, rolls, crackers, biscuits, pancakes, pasta, pies, pastries, pizza, cakes, cookies, and muffins; in fried foods, such as doughnuts; in breakfast cereals, gravy, porridge, and muesli; in semolina; and in drinks such as beer, vodka, and boza (a fermented beverage). In manufacturing wheat products, gluten is valuable to impart viscoelastic functional qualities in dough, enabling the preparation of processed foods such as bread, noodles, and pasta.
=== Nutrition ===
Raw red winter wheat is 13% water, 71% carbohydrates including 12% dietary fibre, 13% protein, and 2% fat (table). Some 75–80% of the protein content is as gluten. In a reference amount of 100 grams (3.5 oz), wheat provides 1,368 kilojoules (327 kilocalories) of food energy and is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of multiple dietary minerals, such as manganese, phosphorus, magnesium, zinc, and iron (table). The B vitamins, niacin (36% DV), thiamine (33% DV), and vitamin B6 (23% DV), are present in significant amounts (table).
Wheat is a significant source of vegetable proteins in human food, having a relatively high protein content compared to other major cereals. However, wheat proteins have a low quality for human nutrition, according to the DIAAS protein quality evaluation method. Though they contain adequate amounts of the other essential amino acids, at least for adults, wheat proteins are deficient in the essential amino acid lysine. Because the gluten proteins present in endosperm are particularly poor in lysine, white flours are more deficient in lysine than are whole grains. Plant breeders have sought to develop lysine-rich wheat varieties, without success, as of 2017. Supplementation with proteins from other food sources (mainly legumes) is used to compensate for this deficiency.
=== Health advisories ===
Consumed worldwide by billions of people, wheat is a significant food for human nutrition, particularly in the least developed countries where wheat products are primary foods. When eaten as the whole grain, wheat supplies multiple nutrients and dietary fibre recommended for children and adults.
In genetically susceptible people, wheat gluten can trigger coeliac disease. Coeliac disease affects about 1% of the general population in developed countries. The only known effective treatment is a strict lifelong gluten-free diet. While coeliac disease is caused by a reaction to wheat proteins, it is not the same as a wheat allergy. Other diseases triggered by eating wheat are non-coeliac gluten sensitivity (estimated to affect 0.5% to 13% of the general population), gluten ataxia, and dermatitis herpetiformis.
Certain short-chain carbohydrates present in wheat, FODMAPs (mainly fructose polymers), may be the cause of non-coeliac gluten sensitivity. As of 2019, FODMAPs explain certain gastrointestinal symptoms, such as bloating, but not the extra-digestive symptoms of non-coeliac gluten sensitivity.
Other wheat proteins, amylase-trypsin inhibitors, appear to activate the innate immune system in coeliac disease and non-coeliac gluten sensitivity. These proteins are part of the plant's natural defense against insects and may cause intestinal inflammation in humans.
== Production and consumption ==
In 2024, world wheat production was 799 million tonnes, led by China, India, and Russia which collectively provided 42% of the world total (table).
In 2024, the largest exporters were Russia (32.7 million tonnes), Canada (25.5), United States (21.8), and Ukraine (20.7), while the largest importers were Egypt (13.1 million tonnes), Indonesia (12.1), and China (11.0).
In 2024, wheat was grown on 219.5 million hectares or 542 million acres worldwide, more than any other food crop.
World trade in wheat at the end of the 20th century was greater than for all other crops combined.
Global demand for wheat is increasing due to the unique viscoelastic and adhesive properties of gluten proteins, which facilitate the production of processed foods, whose consumption is increasing as a result of the worldwide industrialisation process and westernisation of diets.
=== 19th century ===
Wheat became a central agriculture endeavor in the worldwide British Empire in the 19th century, and remains of great importance in Australia, Canada and India. In Australia, with vast lands and a limited work force, expanded production depended on technological advances, especially irrigation and machinery. By the 1840s there were 900 growers in South Australia. They used "Ridley's Stripper", a reaper-harvester perfected by John Ridley in 1843, to remove the heads of grain. In Canada, modern farm implements made large scale wheat farming possible from the late 1840s. By 1879, Saskatchewan was the center, followed by Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario, as the spread of railway lines allowed easy exports to Britain. By 1910, wheat made up 22% of Canada's exports, rising to 25% in 1930 despite the sharp decline in prices during the Great Depression. Efforts to expand wheat production in South Africa, Kenya and India were stymied by low yields and disease. However, by 2000 India had become the second largest producer of wheat in the world. In the 19th century the American wheat frontier moved rapidly westward. By the 1880s 70% of American exports went to British ports. The first successful grain elevator was built in Buffalo in 1842. The cost of transport fell rapidly. In 1869 it cost 37 cents to transport a bushel of wheat from Chicago to Liverpool; in 1905 it was 10 cents.
=== Late 20th century yields ===
In the 20th century, global wheat output expanded about 5-fold, but until about 1955 most of this reflected increases in wheat crop area, with lesser (about 20%) increases in yield per unit area. After 1955 however, there was a ten-fold increase in the rate of wheat yield improvement per year, and this allowed global wheat production to increase. Thus technological innovation and scientific crop management with synthetic nitrogen fertiliser, irrigation and wheat breeding were the main drivers of wheat output growth in the second half of the century. There were some significant decreases in wheat crop area, for instance in North America. Better seed storage and germination ability (and hence a smaller requirement to retain harvested crop for next year's seed) is another 20th-century technological innovation. In medieval England, farmers saved one-quarter of their wheat harvest as seed for the next crop, leaving only three-quarters for food and feed consumption. By 1999, the global average seed use of wheat was about 6% of output.
=== 21st century ===
In the 21st century, global warming is reducing wheat yield in some places. War and tariffs have disrupted trade. Between 2007 and 2009, concern was raised that wheat production would peak, in the same manner as oil. However, at that time global per capita food production had been increasing steadily for decades.
== Agronomy ==
=== Growing wheat ===
Wheat is an annual crop. It can be planted in autumn and harvested in early summer as winter wheat in climates that are not too severe, or planted in spring and harvested in autumn as spring wheat. It is normally planted after tilling the soil by ploughing and then harrowing to kill weeds and create an even surface. The seeds are then scattered on the surface, or drilled into the soil in rows.
Winter wheat lies dormant during a winter freeze; it requires a long period below 4°C, and suffers heat stress and low yield if temperatures rise above 32°C. Winter wheat needs to develop to a height of 10 to 15 cm before the cold intervenes, so as to be able to survive the winter; it requires a period with the temperature at or near freezing, its dormancy then being broken by the thaw or rise in temperature.
Spring wheat does not undergo dormancy. It grows best at between 21 and 24°C, but can tolerate a range between 4°C and 35°C. Germination below 4°C or maturation above 35°C reduce crop yield.
Wheat requires a deep soil, preferably a loam with organic matter, and available minerals including soil nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. An acid and peaty soil is not suitable. It needs some 30 to 38 cm of rain in the growing season to form a good crop of grain.
The farmer may intervene while the crop is growing to add fertiliser, water by irrigation, or pesticides such as herbicides to kill broad-leaved weeds or insecticides to kill insect pests. The farmer may assess soil minerals, soil water, weed growth, or the arrival of pests to decide timely and cost-effective corrective actions, and crop ripeness and water content to select the right moment to harvest. Harvesting involves reaping, cutting the stems to gather the crop; and threshing, breaking the ears to release the grain; both steps are carried out by a combine harvester. The grain is then dried so that it can be stored safe from mould fungi.
=== Crop development ===
Wheat normally needs between 110 and 130 days between sowing and harvest, depending upon climate, seed type, and soil conditions. Optimal crop management requires that the farmer have a detailed understanding of each stage of development in the growing plants. In particular, spring fertilisers, herbicides, fungicides, and growth regulators are typically applied only at specific stages of plant development. For example, it is currently recommended that the second application of nitrogen is made when the ear (not visible at this stage) is about 1 cm in size (Z31 on Zadoks scale). Knowledge of stages is important to identify periods of higher risk from the climate. Farmers benefit from knowing when the 'flag leaf' (last leaf) appears, as it represents about 75% of photosynthesis during the grain filling period, and so should be preserved from disease or insect attacks to ensure a good yield. Several systems exist to identify crop stages, with the Feekes and Zadoks scales being the most widely used. Each scale describes successive stages reached by the crop during the season. For example, the stage of pollen formation from the mother cell, and the stages between anthesis and maturity, are vulnerable to high temperatures, made worse by water stress.
=== Farming techniques ===
Technological advances in soil preparation and seed placement at planting time, use of crop rotation and fertilisers to improve plant growth, and advances in harvesting have combined to promote wheat as a viable crop. When the use of seed drills replaced broadcasting sowing of seed in the 18th century, productivity increased. Yields per unit area increased as crop rotations were applied to land that had long been in cultivation, and the use of fertilisers became widespread.
Improved husbandry has more recently included pervasive automation, starting with the use of threshing machines, and progressing to large and costly machines like the combine harvester which greatly increased productivity. At the same time, better varieties such as Norin 10 wheat, developed in Japan in the 1930s, or the dwarf wheat developed by Norman Borlaug in the Green Revolution, greatly increased yields.
Some large wheat grain-producing countries have significant losses after harvest at the farm, because of poor roads, inadequate storage technologies, inefficient supply chains and farmers' inability to bring the produce into retail markets dominated by small shopkeepers. Some 10% of total wheat production is lost at farm level, another 10% is lost because of poor storage and road networks, and more is lost at the retail level.
In the Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent, as well as North China, irrigation has been a major contributor to increased output. More widely over the last 40 years, a massive increase in fertiliser use together with increased availability of semi-dwarf varieties in developing countries, has greatly increased yields per hectare. In developing countries, use of (mainly nitrogenous) fertiliser increased 25-fold in this period. However, farming systems rely on much more than fertiliser and breeding to improve productivity. A good illustration of this is Australian wheat growing in the southern winter cropping zone, where, despite low rainfall (300 mm), wheat cropping is successful even with relatively little use of nitrogenous fertiliser. This is achieved by crop rotation with leguminous pastures. The inclusion of a canola crop in the rotations has boosted wheat yields by a further 25%. In these low rainfall areas, better use of available soil-water (and better control of soil erosion) is achieved by retaining the stubble after harvesting and by minimising tillage.
== Pests and diseases ==
Pests and diseases consume 21.47% of the world's wheat crop annually.
=== Diseases ===
There are many wheat diseases, mainly caused by fungi, bacteria, and viruses. Plant breeding to develop new disease-resistant varieties, and sound crop management practices are important for preventing disease. Fungicides, used to prevent the significant crop losses from fungal disease, can be a significant variable cost in wheat production. Estimates of the amount of wheat production lost owing to plant diseases vary between 10 and 25% in Missouri. A wide range of organisms infect wheat, of which the most important are viruses and fungi.
Pathogens and wheat are in a constant process of coevolution. Spore-producing wheat rusts are substantially adapted towards successful spore propagation, i.e. increasing their basic reproduction number (R0).
The main wheat-disease categories are:
Seed-borne diseases: these include seed-borne scab, seed-borne Stagonospora (previously known as Septoria), common bunt (stinking smut), and loose smut. These are managed with fungicides.
Leaf- and head- blight diseases: Powdery mildew, leaf rust, Septoria tritici leaf blotch, Stagonospora (Septoria) nodorum leaf and glume blotch, and Fusarium head scab.
Crown and root rot diseases: Two of the more important of these are 'take-all' and Cephalosporium stripe. Both of these diseases are soil borne.
Stem rust diseases: Caused by Puccinia graminis f. sp. tritici (basidiomycete) fungi e.g. Ug99
Wheat blast: Caused by Magnaporthe oryzae Triticum.
Viral diseases: Wheat spindle streak mosaic (yellow mosaic) and barley yellow dwarf are the two most common viral diseases. Control can be achieved by using resistant varieties.
A historically significant disease of cereals including wheat, though commoner in rye is ergot; it is unusual among plant diseases in also causing sickness in humans who ate grain contaminated with the fungus involved, Claviceps purpurea.
=== Animal pests ===
Among insect pests of wheat is the wheat stem sawfly,
a chronic pest in the Northern Great Plains of the United States and in the Canadian Prairies.
Wheat is the food plant of the larvae of some Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) species including the flame, rustic shoulder-knot, setaceous Hebrew character and turnip moth. Early in the season, many species of birds and rodents feed upon wheat crops. These animals can cause significant damage to a crop by digging up and eating newly planted seeds or young plants. They can also damage the crop late in the season by eating the grain from the mature spike. Recent post-harvest losses in cereals amount to billions of dollars per year in the United States alone, and damage to wheat by various borers, beetles and weevils is no exception. Rodents can also cause major losses during storage, and in major grain growing regions, field mice numbers can sometimes build up explosively to plague proportions because of the ready availability of food. To reduce the amount of wheat lost to post-harvest pests, Agricultural Research Service scientists have developed an "insect-o-graph", which can detect insects in wheat that are not visible to the naked eye. The device uses electrical signals to detect the insects as the wheat is being milled. The new technology is so precise that it can detect 5–10 infested seeds out of 30,000 good ones.
== Breeding objectives ==
In traditional agricultural systems, wheat populations consist of landraces, informal and often diverse farmer-maintained populations. Landraces of wheat continue to be important outside America and Europe. Formal wheat breeding began in the nineteenth century, when single line varieties were created by selecting seed from a plant with desired properties. Modern wheat breeding developed early in the twentieth century, linked to the development of Mendelian genetics. The standard method of breeding inbred wheat cultivars is by crossing two lines using hand emasculation, then selfing or inbreeding the progeny. Selections are identified genetically ten or more generations before release as a cultivar.
Major breeding objectives include high grain yield, good quality, disease- and insect resistance and tolerance to abiotic stresses, including mineral, moisture and heat tolerance. Wheat has been the subject of mutation breeding, with the use of gamma-, x-rays, ultraviolet light, and harsh chemicals. Since 1960, hundreds of varieties have been created through these methods, mostly in populous countries such as China. Bread wheat with high grain iron and zinc content has been developed through gamma radiation breeding, and through conventional selection breeding. International wheat breeding is led by the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center in Mexico. ICARDA is another major public sector international wheat breeder, but it was forced to relocate from Syria to Lebanon in the Syrian Civil War.
=== For higher yields ===
The presence of certain versions of wheat genes has been important for crop yields. Genes for the 'dwarfing' trait, first used by Japanese wheat breeders to produce Norin 10 short-stalked wheat, have had a huge effect on wheat yields worldwide, and were major factors in the success of the Green Revolution in Mexico and Asia, an initiative led by Norman Borlaug. Dwarfing genes enable the carbon that is fixed in the plant during photosynthesis to be diverted towards seed production, and reduce lodging, when a tall ear stalk falls over in the wind. By 1997, 81% of the developing world's wheat area was planted to semi-dwarf wheats, giving both increased yields and better response to nitrogenous fertiliser.
T. turgidum subsp. polonicum, known for its longer glumes and grains, has been bred into main wheat lines for its grain size effect, and likely has contributed these traits to T. petropavlovskyi and the Portuguese landrace group Arrancada. As with many plants, MADS-box influences flower development, and more specifically, as with other agricultural Poaceae, influences yield. Despite that importance, as of 2021 little research has been done into MADS-box and other such spikelet and flower genetics in wheat specifically.
The world record wheat yield is about 17 tonnes per hectare (15,000 pounds per acre), reached in New Zealand in 2017. A project in the UK, led by Rothamsted Research has aimed to raise wheat yields in the country to 20 t/ha (18,000 lb/acre) by 2020, but in 2018 the UK record stood at 16 t/ha (14,000 lb/acre), and the average yield was just 8 t/ha (7,100 lb/acre).
=== For disease resistance ===
Wild grasses in the genus Triticum and related genera, and grasses such as rye have been a source of many disease-resistance traits for cultivated wheat breeding since the 1930s. Some resistance genes have been identified against Pyrenophora tritici-repentis, especially races 1 and 5, those most problematic in Kazakhstan. Wild relative, Aegilops tauschii is the source of several genes effective against TTKSK/Ug99 - Sr33, Sr45, Sr46, and SrTA1662.
Lr67 is an R gene, a dominant negative for partial adult resistance discovered and molecularly characterised by Moore et al., 2015. As of 2018 Lr67 is effective against all races of leaf, stripe, and stem rusts, and powdery mildew (Blumeria graminis). This is produced by a mutation of two amino acids in what is predicted to be a hexose transporter. The result is to reduce glucose uptake.
Lr34 is widely deployed in cultivars as it confers resistance against leaf- and stripe-rusts, and powdery mildew. It is used intensively in wheat cultivation worldwide. It is an ABC transporter, producing a 'slow rusting'/adult resistance phenotype.
Pm8 is a widely used powdery mildew resistance introgressed from rye (Secale cereale). It comes from the rye 1R chromosome, a source of many resistances since the 1960s.
Resistance to Fusarium head blight (FHB, Fusarium ear blight) is an important breeding target. Marker-assisted breeding panels involving kompetitive allele specific PCR can be used. A KASP genetic marker for a pore-forming toxin-like gene provides FHB resistance.
In 2003 the first resistance genes against fungal diseases in wheat were isolated. In 2021, novel resistance genes were identified in wheat against powdery mildew and wheat leaf rust.
Modified resistance genes have been tested in transgenic wheat and barley plants.
=== To create hybrid vigour ===
Because wheat self-pollinates, creating hybrid seed to provide heterosis, hybrid vigour (as in F1 hybrids of maize), is extremely labour-intensive; the high cost of hybrid wheat seed has kept farmers from adopting them widely despite nearly 90 years of effort. Commercial hybrid wheat seed has been produced using chemical hybridising agents, plant growth regulators that interfere with pollen development, or naturally occurring cytoplasmic male sterility systems. Hybrid wheat has been a limited commercial success in France, the United States and South Africa.
Synthetic hexaploids made by crossing the wild goatgrass wheat ancestor Aegilops tauschii, and other Aegilops, with durum wheats are being deployed, increasing the genetic diversity of cultivated wheats.
=== For gluten content ===
Modern bread wheat varieties have been cross-bred to contain greater amounts of gluten. However, a 2020 study found no changes in albumin/globulin and gluten content between 1891 and 2010.
=== For water efficiency ===
Stomata (or leaf pores) are involved in both uptake of carbon dioxide gas from the atmosphere and water vapor losses from the leaf due to water transpiration. Basic physiological investigation of these gas exchange processes has yielded carbon isotope based method used for breeding wheat varieties with improved water-use efficiency. These varieties can improve crop productivity in rain-fed dry-land wheat farms.
=== For insect resistance ===
The complex genome of wheat has made its improvement difficult. Comparison of hexaploid wheat genomes using a range of chromosome pseudomolecule and molecular scaffold assemblies in 2020 has enabled the resistance potential of its genes to be assessed. Findings include the identification of "a detailed multi-genome-derived nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeat protein repertoire" which contributes to disease resistance, while the gene Sm1 provides a degree of insect resistance, for instance against the orange wheat blossom midge.
== Genomics ==
=== Decoding the genome ===
In 2010, 95% of the genome of Chinese Spring line 42 wheat was decoded. This genome was released in a basic format for scientists and plant breeders to use but was not fully annotated. In 2012, an essentially complete gene set of bread wheat was published. Random shotgun libraries of total DNA and cDNA from the T. aestivum cv. Chinese Spring (CS42) were sequenced to generate 85 Gb of sequence (220 million reads) and identified between 94,000 and 96,000 genes. In 2018, a more complete Chinese Spring genome was released by a different team. In 2020, 15 genome sequences from various locations and varieties around the world were reported, with examples of their own use of the sequences to locate particular insect and disease resistance factors. Wheat Blast Resistance is controlled by R genes which are highly race-specific.
For decades, the primary genetic modification technique has been non-homologous end joining. However, since its introduction, the CRISPR/Cas9 tool has been extensively used, for example:
To intentionally damage three homologs of TaNP1 (a glucose-methanol-choline oxidoreductase gene) to produce a novel male sterility trait, by Li et al. 2020
Blumeria graminis f.sp. tritici resistance has been produced by Shan et al. 2013 and Wang et al. 2014 by editing one of the mildew resistance locus o genes (more specifically one of the Triticum aestivum MLO (TaMLO) genes)
T. aestivum EDR1 (TaEDR1) (the EDR1 gene, which inhibits Bmt resistance) has been knocked out by Zhang et al. 2017 to improve that resistance
T. aestivum HRC (TaHRC) has been disabled by Su et al. 2019 thus producing Gibberella zeae resistance.
T. aestivum Ms1 (TaMs1) has been knocked out by Okada et al. 2019 to produce another novel male sterility
and T. aestivum acetolactate synthase (TaALS) and T. aestivum acetyl-CoA-carboxylase (TaACC) were subjected to base changes by Zhang et al. 2019 (in two publications) to confer herbicide resistance to ALS inhibitors and ACCase inhibitors respectively
== In art ==
The Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh created the series Wheat Fields between 1885 and 1890, consisting of dozens of paintings made mostly in different parts of rural France. They depict wheat crops, sometimes with farm workers, in varied seasons and styles, sometimes green, sometimes at harvest. Wheatfield with Crows was one of his last paintings, and is considered to be among his greatest works.
In 1967, the American artist Thomas Hart Benton made his oil on wood painting Wheat, showing a row of uncut wheat plants, occupying almost the whole height of the painting, between rows of freshly-cut stubble. The painting is held by the Smithsonian American Art Museum.
In 1982, the American conceptual artist Agnes Denes grew a two-acre field of wheat at Battery Park, Manhattan. The ephemeral artwork has been described as an act of protest. The harvested wheat was divided and sent to 28 world cities for an exhibition entitled "The International Art Show for the End of World Hunger".
== See also ==
Marquis wheat
Red Fife wheat
Effects of climate change on agriculture
Gluten-free diet – Diet excluding proteins found in wheat, barley, and rye
Wheat germ oil – Oil extracted from the embryo of a wheat seed
Wheat middlings – By-product of wheat milling
Wheat production in the United States
Whole-wheat flour – Powder made from the grinding of wheat used for human consumptionPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
== References ==
== Sources ==
Khan, K. (2016). "Wheat Classes − Producing Nations". Wheat: Chemistry and Technology. American Association of Cereal Chemists International. Elsevier Science. ISBN 978-0-12-810454-5.
== Further reading ==
== External links ==
Media related to Wheat at Wikimedia Commons
Triticum species at Purdue University (1971)

Produced by Million Book Project, Juliet Sutherland, Tricia
Gilbert and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net
A SHORT HISTORY OF ENGLISH AGRICULTURE
W.H.R. CURTLER
OXFORD
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1909
HENRY FROWDE, M.A.
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE
PREFACE
'A husbandman', said Markham, 'is the master of the earth, turning
barrenness into fruitfulness, whereby all commonwealths are
maintained and upheld. His labour giveth liberty to all vocations,
arts, and trades to follow their several functions with peace and
industrie. What can we say in this world is profitable where
husbandry is wanting, it being the great nerve and sinew which
holdeth together all the joints of a monarchy?' And he is confirmed
by Young: 'Agriculture is, beyond all doubt, the foundation of every
other art, business, and profession, and it has therefore been the
ideal policy of every wise and prudent people to encourage it to the
utmost.' Yet of this important industry, still the greatest in
England, there is no history covering the whole period.
It is to remedy this defect that this book is offered, with much
diffidence, and with many thanks to Mr. C.R.L. Fletcher of Magdalen
College, Oxford, for his valuable assistance in revising the proof
sheets, and to the Rev. A.H. Johnson of All Souls for some very
useful information.
As the agriculture of the Middle Ages has often been ably described,
I have devoted the greater part of this work to the agricultural
history of the subsequent period, especially the seventeenth,
eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries.
W.H.R. CURTLER.
_May 22, 1909._
CONTENTS
CHAPTER I
Communistic Farming.--Growth of the Manor.--Early Prices.--The
Organization and Agriculture of the Manor
CHAPTER II
The Thirteenth Century.--The Manor at its Zenith, with Seeds of Decay
already visible.--Walter of Henley
CHAPTER III
The Fourteenth Century.--Decline of Agriculture.--The Black Death.--
Statute of Labourers
CHAPTER IV
How the Classes connected with the Land lived in the Middle Ages
CHAPTER V
The Break-up of the Manor.--Spread of Leases.--The Peasants'
Revolt.--Further Attempts to regulate Wages.--A Harvest
Home.--Beginning of the Corn Laws.--Some Surrey Manors
CHAPTER VI
1400-1540. The so-called 'Golden Age of the Labourer' in a Period of
General Distress
CHAPTER VII
Enclosure
CHAPTER VIII
Fitzherbert.--The Regulation of Hours and Wages
CHAPTER IX
1540-1600. Progress at last--Hop-growing.--Progress of Enclosure.--
Harrison's _Description_
CHAPTER X
1540-1600. Live Stock.--Flax.--Saffron.--The Potato.--The Assessment
of Wages
CHAPTER XI
1600-1700. Clover and Turnips.--Great Rise in Prices.--More
Enclosure.--A Farming Calendar
CHAPTER XII
The Great Agricultural Writers of the Seventeenth Century.--Fruit-growing.
--A Seventeenth-century Orchard
CHAPTER XIII
The Evils of Common Fields.--Hops.--Implements.--Manures.--Gregory
King.--Corn Laws
CHAPTER XIV
1700-65. General Characteristics of the Eighteenth Century.--Crops.
--Cattle.--Dairying.--Poultry.--Tull and the New Husbandry.--Bad
Times.--Fruit-growing
CHAPTER XV
1700-65. Townshend.--Sheep-rot.--Cattle Plague.--Fruit-growing
CHAPTER XVI
1765-93. Arthur Young.--Crops and their Cost.--The Labourers'
Wages and Diet.--The Prosperity of Farmers.--The Country
Squire.--Elkington.--Bakewell.--The Roads.--Coke of Holkham
CHAPTER XVII
1793-1815. The Great French War.--The Board of Agriculture.--High
Prices, and Heavy Taxation
CHAPTER XVIII
Enclosure.--The Small Owner
CHAPTER XIX
1816-37. Depression
CHAPTER XX
1837-75. Revival of Agriculture.--The Royal Agricultural
Society.--Corn Law Repeal.--A Temporary Set-back.--The Halcyon Days
CHAPTER XXI
1875-1908. Agricultural Distress again.--Foreign Competition.--
Agricultural Holdings Act.--New Implements.--Agricultural
Commissions.--The Situation in 1908
CHAPTER XXII
Imports and Exports.--Live Stock
CHAPTER XXIII
Modern Farm Live Stock
APPENDICES
I. Average Prices from 1259 to 1700
II. Exports and Imports of Wheat and Flour from and into England,
unimportant years omitted
III. Average Prices per Imperial Quarter of British Corn in England
and Wales, in each year from 1771 to 1907 inclusive
IV. Miscellaneous Information
LANDMARKS IN ENGLISH AGRICULTURE
1086. Domesday inquest, most cultivated land in tillage. Annual value
of land about 2d. an acre.
1216-72. Henry III. Assize of Bread and Ale.
1272-1307. Edward I. General progress. Walter of Henley.
1307. Edward II. Decline.
1315. Great famine.
1337. Export of wool prohibited.
1348-9. Black Death. Heavy blow to manorial system. Many demesne
lands let, and much land laid down to grass.
1351. Statute of Labourers.
1360. Export of corn forbidden.
1381. Villeins' revolt.
1393. Richard II allows export of corn under certain conditions.
1463. Import of wheat under 6s. 8d. prohibited.
End of fifteenth century. Increase of enclosure.
1523. Fitzherbert's _Surveying and Husbandry_.
1540. General rise in prices and rents begins.
1549. Kett's rebellion. The last attempt of the English peasant to
obtain redress by force.
1586. Potatoes introduced.
1601. Poor Law Act of Elizabeth.
1645. Turnips and clover introduced as field crops.
1662. Statute of Parochial Settlement.
1664. Importation of cattle, sheep, and swine forbidden.
1688. Bounty of 5s. per quarter on export of wheat, and high duty on
import.
1733. Tull publishes his _Horse-hoeing Husbandry_.
1739. Great sheep-rot.
1750. Exports of corn reached their maximum.
1760. Bakewell began experimenting.
1760 (about). Industrial and agrarian revolution, and great increase
of enclosure.
1764. Elkington's new drainage system.
1773. Wheat allowed to be imported at a nominal duty of 6d. a quarter
when over 48s.
1777. Bath and West of England Society established, the first in
England.
1789. England definitely becomes a corn-importing country.
1793. Board of Agriculture established.
1795. Speenhamland Act.
About same date swedes first grown.
1815. Duty on wheat reached its maximum.
1815-35. Agricultural distress.
1825. Export of wool allowed.
1835. Smith of Deanston, the father of modern drainage.
1838. Foundation of Royal Agricultural Society.
1846. Repeal of the Corn Laws.
1855-75. Great agricultural prosperity.
1875. English agriculture feels the full effect of unrestricted
competition with disastrous results.
" First Agricultural Holdings Act.
1879-80. Excessive rainfall, sheep-rot, and general distress.
CHAPTER I
When the early bands of English invaders came over to take Britain
from its Celtic owners, it is almost certain that the soil was held by
groups and not by individuals, and as this was the practice of the
conquerors also they readily fell in with the system they found.[1]
These English, unlike their descendants of to day, were a race of
countrymen and farmers and detested the towns, preferring the lands of
the Britons to the towns of the Romans. Co-operation in agriculture
was necessary because to each household were allotted separate strips
of land, nearly equal in size, in each field set apart for tillage,
and a share in the meadow and waste land. The strips of arable were
unfenced and ploughed by common teams, to which each family would
contribute.
Apparently, as the land was cleared and broken up it was dealt out
acre by acre to each cultivator; and supposing each group consisted of
ten families, the typical holding of 120 acres was assigned to each
family in acre strips, and these strips were not all contiguous but
mixed up with those of other families. The reason for this mixture of
strips is obvious to any one who knows how land even in the same field
varies in quality; it was to give each family its share of both good
and bad land, for the householders were all equal and the principle on
which the original distribution of the land depended was that of
equalizing the shares of the different members of the community.[2]
In attributing ownership of lands to communities we must be careful
not to confound communities with corporations. Maitland thinks the
early land-owning communities blended the character of corporations
and of co-owners, and co-ownership is ownership by individuals.[3] The
vills or villages founded on their arrival in Britain by our English
forefathers resembled those they left at home, and even there the
strips into which the arable fields were divided were owned in
severalty by the householders of the village. There was co-operation
in working the fields but no communistic division of the crops, and
the individual's hold upon his strips developed rapidly into an
inheritable and partible ownership. 'At the opening of Anglo-Saxon
history absolute ownership of land in severalty was established and
becoming the rule.'[4]
In the management of the meadow land communal features were much more
clearly brought out; the arable was not reallotted,[5] but the meadow
was, annually; while the woods and pastures, the right of using which
belonged to the householders of the village, were owned by the village
'community'. There may have been at the time of the English conquest
Roman 'villas' with slaves and _coloni_ cultivating the owners'
demesnes, which passed bodily to the new masters; but the former
theory seems true of the greater part of the country.
At first 'extensive' cultivation was practised; that is, every year a
fresh arable field was broken up and the one cultivated last year
abandoned, for a time at all events; but gradually 'intensive' culture
superseded this, probably not till after the English had conquered the
land, and the same field was cultivated year after year.[6] After the
various families or households had finished cutting the grass in their
allotted portions of meadow, and the corn on their strips of tillage,
both grass and stubble became common land and were thrown open for the
whole community to turn their stock upon.
The size of the strips of land in the arable fields varied, but was
generally an acre, in most places a furlong (furrow long) or 220 yards
in length, and 22 yards broad; or in other words, 40 rods of 5-1/2
yards in length and 4 in breadth. There was, however, little
uniformity in measurement before the Norman Conquest, the rod by which
the furlongs and acres were measured varying in length from 12 to 24
feet, so that one acre might be four times as large as another.[7] The
acre was, roughly speaking, the amount that a team could plough in a
day, and seems to have been from early times the unit of measuring the
area of land.[8] Of necessity the real acre and the ideal acre were
also different, for the reason that the former had to contend with the
inequalities of the earth's surface and varied much when no scientific
measurement was possible. As late as 1820 the acre was of many
different sizes in England. In Bedfordshire it was 2 roods, in Dorset
134 perches instead of 160, in Lincolnshire 5 roods, in Staffordshire
2-1/4 acres. To-day the Cheshire acre is 10,240 square yards. As,
however, an acre was and is a day's ploughing for a team, we may
assume that the most usual acre was the same area then as now. There
were also half-acre strips, but whatever the size the strips were
divided one from another by narrow grass paths generally called
'balks', and at the end of a group of these strips was the 'headland'
where the plough turned, the name being common to-day. Many of these
common fields remained until well on in the nineteenth century; in
1815 half the county of Huntingdon was in this condition, and a few
still exist.[9] Cultivating the same field year after year naturally
exhausted the soil, so that the two-field system came in, under which
one was cultivated and the other left fallow; and this was followed by
the three-field system, by which two were cropped in any one year and
one lay fallow, the last-named becoming general as it yielded better
results, though the former continued, especially in the North. Under
the three-field plan the husbandman early in the autumn would plough
the field that had been lying fallow during summer, and sow wheat or
rye; in the spring he broke up the stubble of the field on which the
last wheat crop had been grown and sowed barley or oats; in June he
ploughed up the stubble of the last spring crop and fallowed the
field.[10] As soon as the crops began to grow in the arable fields and
the grass in the meadows to spring, they were carefully fenced to
prevent trespass of man and beast; and, as soon as the crops came off,
the fields became common for all the village to turn their stock upon,
the arable fields being usually common from Lammas (August 1) to
Candlemas (February 2) and the meadows from July 6, old Midsummer Day,
to Candlemas[11]; but as in this climate the season both of hay and
corn harvest varies considerably, these dates cannot have been fixed.
The stock, therefore, besides the common pasture, had after harvest
the grazing of the common arable fields and of the meadows. The common
pasture was early 'stinted' or limited, the usual custom being that
the villager could turn out as many stock as he could keep on his
holding. The trouble of pulling up and taking down these fences every
year must have been enormous, and we find legislation on this
important matter at an early date. About 700 the laws of Ine, King of
Wessex, provided that if 'churls have a common meadow or other
partible land to fence, and some have fenced their part and some have
not, and cattle stray in and eat up their common corn or grass; let
those go who own the gap and compensate to the others who have fenced
their part the damage which then may be done, and let them demand such
justice on the cattle as may be right. But if there be a beast which
breaks hedges and goes in everywhere, and he who owns it will not or
cannot restrain it, let him who finds it in his field take it and slay
it, and let the owner take its skin and flesh and forfeit the rest.'
England was not given over to one particular type of settlement,
although villages were more common than hamlets in the greater part of
the country.[12] The vill or village answers to the modern civil
parish, and the term may be applied to both the true or 'nucleated'
village of clustered houses and the village of scattered hamlets, each
of a few houses, existing chiefly on the Celtic fringe. The population
of some of the villages at the time of the Norman Conquest was
numerous, 100 households or 500 people; but the average townships
contained from 10 to 20 households.[13] There was also the single
farm, such as that at Eardisley in Herefordshire, described in
Domesday, lying in the middle of a forest, perhaps, as in other
similar cases, a pioneer settlement of some one more adventurous than
his fellows.[14]
* * * * *
Such was the early village community in England, a community of free
landholders. But a change began early to come over it.[15] The king
would grant to a church all the rights he had in the village,
reserving only the _trinoda necessitas_, these rights including the
feorm or farm, or provender rent which the king derived from the
land--of cattle, sheep, swine, ale, honey, &c.--which he collected by
visiting his villages, thus literally eating his rents. The churchmen
did not continue these visits, they remained in their monasteries, and
had the feorm brought them regularly; they had an overseer in the
village to see to this, and so they tightened their hold on the
village. Then the smaller people, the peasants, make gifts to the
Church. They give their land, but they also want to keep it, for it is
their livelihood; so they surrender the land and take it back as a
lifelong loan. Probably on the death of the donor his heirs are
suffered to hold the land. Then labour services are substituted for
the old provender rents, and thus the Church acquires a demesne, and
thus the foundations of the manorial system, still to be traced all
over the country, were laid. Thegns, the predecessors of the Norman
barons, become the recipients of grants from the churches and from
kings, and householders 'commend' themselves and their land to them
also, so that they acquired demesnes. This 'commendation' was
furthered by the fact that during the long-drawn out conquest of
Britain the old kindred groups of the English lost their corporate
sense, and the central power being too weak to protect the ordinary
householder, who could not stand alone, he had to seek the protection
of an ecclesiastical corporation or of some thegn, first for himself
and then for his land. The jurisdictional rights of the king also
passed to the lord, whether church or thegn; then came the danegeld,
the tax for buying off the Danes that subsequently became a fixed land
tax, which was collected from the lord, as the peasants were too poor
for the State to deal with them; the lord paid the geld for their
land, consequently their land was his. In this way the free ceorl of
Anglo-Saxon times gradually becomes the 'villanus' of Domesday.
Landlordship was well established in the two centuries before the
Conquest, and the land of England more or less 'carved into
territorial lordships'.[16] Therefore when the Normans brought their
wonderful genius for organization to this country they found the
material conditions of manorial life in full growth; it was their task
to develop its legal and economic side.[17]
As the manorial system thus superimposed upon the village community
was the basis of English rural economy for centuries, there need be no
apology for describing it at some length.
The term 'manor', which came in with the Conquest,[18] has a technical
meaning in Domesday, referring to the system of taxation, and did not
always coincide with the vill or village, though it commonly did so,
except in the eastern portion of England. The village was the agrarian
unit, the manor the fiscal unit; so that where the manor comprised
more than one village, as was frequently the case, there would be more
than one village organization for working the common fields.[19]
The manor then was the 'constitutive cell' of English mediaeval
society.[20] The structure is always the same; under the headship of
the lord we find two layers of population, the villeins and the
freeholders; and the territory is divided into demesne land and
tributary land of two classes, viz. that of the villeins and that of
the freeholders. The cultivation of the demesne (which usually means
the land directly occupied and cultivated by the lord, though legally
it has a wider meaning and includes the villein tenements), depends to
a certain extent on the work supplied by the tenants of the tributary
land. Rents are collected, labour superintended, administrative
business transacted by a set of manorial officers.
We may divide the tillers of the soil at the time of Domesday into
five great classes[21] in order of dignity and freedom:
1. Liberi homines, or freemen.
2. Socmen.
3. Villeins.
4. Bordarii, cotarii, buri or coliberti.
5. Slaves.
The two first of these classes were to be found in large numbers in
Norfolk, Suffolk, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire, and
Northamptonshire. It is not easy to draw the line between them, but
the chief distinction lay in the latter being more burdened with
service and customary dues and more especially subject to the
jurisdictional authority of the lord.[22] They were both free, but
both rendered services to the lord for their land. Both the freemen
and the slaves by 1086 were rapidly decreasing in number.
The most numerous class[23] on the manors was the third, that of the
villeins or non-free tenants, who held their land by payment of
services to the lord. The position of the villein under the feudal
system is most complicated. He both was and was not a freeman. He was
absolutely at the disposal of the lord, who could sell him with his
tenement, and he could not leave his land without his lord's
permission. He laboured under many disabilities, such as the merchet
or fine for marrying his daughter, and fines for selling horse or ox.
On the other hand, he was free against every one but his lord, and
even against the lord was protected from the forfeiture of his
'wainage' or instruments of labour and from injury to life and
limb.[24]
His usual holding was a virgate of 30 acres of arable, though the
virgate differed in size even in the same manors; but in addition to
this he would have his meadow land and his share in the common pasture
and wood, altogether about 100 acres of land. For this he rendered the
following services to the lord of the manor:
1. Week work, or labour on the lord's demesne for two or three days a
week during most of the year, and four or five days in summer. It was
not always the villein himself, however, who rendered these services,
he might send his son or even a hired labourer; and it was the holding
and not the holder that was considered primarily responsible for the
rendering of services.[25]
2. Precarii or boon days: that is, work generally during harvest, at
the lord's request, sometimes instead of week work, sometimes in
addition.
3. Gafol or tribute: fixed payments in money or kind, and such
services as 'fold soke', which forced the tenants' sheep to lie on the
lord's land for the sake of the manure; and suit of mill, by which the
tenant was bound to grind his corn in the lord's mill.
With regard to the 'boon days' in harvest, it should be remembered
that harvest time in the Middle Ages was a most important event.
Agriculture was the great industry, and when the corn was ripe the
whole village turned out to gather it, the only exceptions being the
housewives and sometimes the marriageable daughters. Even the larger
towns suspended work that the townsmen might assist in the harvest,
and our long vacation was probably intended originally to cover the
whole work of gathering in the corn and hay. On the occasion of the
'boon-day' work, the lord usually found food for the labourers which,
the Inquisition of Ardley[26] tells us, might be of the following
description: for two men, porridge of beans and peas and two loaves,
one white, the other of 'mixtil' bread; that is, wheat, barley, and
rye mixed together, with a piece of meat, and beer for their first
meal. Then in the evening they had a small loaf of mixtil bread and
two 'lescas' of cheese. While harvest work was going on the better-off
tenants, usually the free ones, were sometimes employed to ride about,
rod in hand, superintending the others.
The services of the villeins were often very comprehensive, and even
included such tasks as preparing the lord's bath; but on some manors
their services were very light.[27] When the third of the above
obligations, the gafol or tribute, was paid in kind it was most
commonly made in corn; and next came honey, one of the most important
articles of the Middle Ages, as it was used for both lighting and
sweetening purposes. Ale was also common, and poultry and eggs, and
sometimes the material for implements.
These obligations were imposed for the most part on free and unfree
tenants alike, though those of the free were much lighter than those
of the unfree; the chief difference between the two, as far as tenure
of the land went, lay in the fact that the former could exercise
proprietary rights over his holding more or less freely, the latter
had none.[28] It seems very curious to the modern mind that the
villein, a man who farmed about 100 acres of land, should have been in
such a servile condition.
The amount of work due from each villein came to be fixed by the
extent or survey of the manor, but the quality of it was not[29];
that is, each one knew how many days he had to work, but not whether
he was to plough, sow, or harrow, &c. It is surprising to find, that
on the festival days of the Church, which were very numerous and
observed as holy days, the lord lost by no work being done, and the
same was the case in wet weather.
One of the most important duties of the tenant was the 'averagium', or
duty of carrying for the lord, especially necessary when his manors
were often a long way apart. He would often have to carry corn to the
nearest town for sale, the products of one manor to another, also to
haul manure on to the demesne. If he owned neither horse nor ox, he
would sometimes have to use his own back.[30]
The holding of the villein did not admit of partition by sale or
descent, it remained undivided and entire. When the holder died all
the land went to one of the sons if there were several, often to the
youngest. The others sought work on the manor as craftsmen or
labourers, or remained on the family plot. The holding therefore might
contain more than one family, but to the lord remained one and
undivided.[31]
In the fourth class came the bordarii, the cotarii, and the coliberti
or buri; or, as we should say, the crofters, the cottagers, and the
boors.
The bordarii numbered 82,600 in Domesday, and were subject to the same
kind of services as the villeins, but the amount of the service was
considerably less.[32] Their usual holding was 5 acres, and they are
very often found on the demesne of the manor, evidently in this case
labourers on the demesne, settled in cottages and provided with a bit
of land of their own. The name failed to take root in this country,
and the bordarii seem to become villeins or cottiers.[33]
The cotarii, cottiers or cottagers, were 6,800 in number, with small
pieces of land sometimes reaching 5 acres.[34] Distinctly inferior to
the villeins, bordarii, and cottars, but distinctly superior to the
slaves, were the buri or coliberti who, with the bordars and cottars,
would form a reserve of labour to supplement the ordinary working days
at times when work was pressing, as in hay time and harvest. At the
bottom of the social ladder in Domesday came the slaves, some 25,000
in number, who in the main had no legal rights, a class which had
apparently already diminished and was diminishing in numbers, so that
for the cultivation of the demesne the lord was coming to rely more on
the labour of his tenants, and consequently the labour services of the
villeins were being augmented.[35] The agricultural labourer as we
understand him, a landless man working solely for wages in cash, was
almost unknown.
All the arrangements of the manor aimed at supplying labour for the
cultivation of the lord's demesne, and he had three chief officers to
superintend it:
1. The seneschal, who answers to our modern steward or land agent, and
where there were several manors supervised all of them. He attended to
the legal business and held the manor courts. It was his duty to be
acquainted with every particular of the manor, its cultivation,
extent, number of teams, condition of the stock, &c. He was also the
legal adviser of his lord; in fact, very much like his modern
successor.
2. The bailiff for each manor, who collected rents, went to market to
buy and sell, surveyed the timber, superintended the ploughing,
mowing, reaping, &c., that were due as services from the tenants on
the lord's demesne; and according to _Fleta_ he was to prevent their
'casting off before the work was done', and to measure it when
done.[36] And considering that those he superintended were not paid
for their work, but rendering more or less unwelcome services, his
task could not have been easy.
3. The praepositus or reeve, an office obligatory on every holder of a
certain small quantity of land; a sort of foreman nominated from among
the villeins, and to a certain extent representing their interests.
His duties were supplementary to those of the bailiff: he looked after
all the live and dead stock of the manor, saw to the manuring of the
land, kept a tally of the day's work, had charge of the granary, and
delivered therefrom corn to be baked and malt to be brewed.[37]
Besides these three officers, on a large estate there would be a
messor who took charge of the harvest, and many lesser officers, such
as those of the akermanni, or leaders of the unwieldy plough teams;
oxherds, shepherds, and swineherds to tend cattle, sheep, and pigs
when they were turned on the common fields or wandered in the waste;
also wardens of the woods and fences, often paid by a share in the
profits connected with their charge; for instance, the swineherd of
Glastonbury Abbey received a sucking-pig a year, the interior parts of
the best pig, and the tails of all the others slaughtered.[38] On the
great estates these offices tended to become hereditary, and many
families did treat them as hereditary property, and were a great
nuisance in consequence to their lords. At Glastonbury we find the
chief shepherd so important a person that he was party to an agreement
concerning a considerable quantity of land.[39] There were also on
some manors 'cadaveratores', whose duty was to look into and report on
the losses of cattle and sheep from murrain, a melancholy tale of the
unhealthy conditions of agriculture.
The supervision of the tenants was often incessant and minute.
According to the Court Rolls of the Manor of Manydown in Hampshire,
tenants were brought to book for all kinds of transgressions. The
fines are so numerous that it almost appears that every person on the
estate was amerced from time to time. In 1365 seven tenants were
convicted of having pigs in their lord's crops, one let his horse run
in the growing corn, two had cattle among the peas, four had cattle on
the lord's pasture, three had made default in rent or service, four
were convicted of assault, nine broke the assize of beer, two had
failed to repair their houses or buildings. In all thirty-four were in
trouble out of a population of some sixty families. The account is
eloquent of the irritating restrictions of the manor, and of the
inconveniences of common farming.[40]
It is impossible to compare the receipts of the lord of the manor at
this period with modern rents, or the position of the villein with the
agricultural labourer; it may be said that the lord received a labour
rent for the villein's holding, or that the villein received his
holding as wages for the services done for the lord,[41] and part of
the return due to the lord was for the use of the oxen with which he
had stocked the villein's holding.
Though in 1066 there were many free villages, yet by the time of
Domesday they were fast disappearing and there were manors everywhere,
usually coinciding with the village which we may picture to ourselves
as self-sufficing estates, often isolated by stretches of dense
woodland and moor from one another, and making each veritably a little
world in itself. At the same time it is evident from the extent of
arable land described in Domesday that many manors were not greatly
isolated, and pasture ground was often common to two or more
villages.[42]
If we picture to ourselves the typical manor, we shall see a large
part of the lord's demesne forming a compact area within which stood
his house; this being in addition to the lord's strips in the open
fields intermixed with those of his tenants. The mansion house was
usually a very simple affair, built of wood and consisting chiefly of
a hall; which even as late as the seventeenth century in some cases
served as kitchen, dining room, parlour, and sleeping room for the
men; and one or two other rooms.[43] It is probable that in early
times the thegns possessed in most cases only one manor apiece,[44] so
that the manor house was then nearly always inhabited by the lord, but
after the Conquest, when manors were bestowed by scores and even
hundreds by William on his successful soldiers, many of them can only
have acted as the temporary lodging of the lord when he came to
collect his rent, or as the house of the bailiff. According to the
_Gerefa_, written about 1000--and there was very little alteration for
a long time afterwards--the mansion was adjacent to a court or yard
which the quadrangular homestead surrounded with its barns, horse and
cattle stalls, sheep pens and fowlhouse. Within this court were ovens,
kilns, salt-house, and malt-house, and perhaps the hayricks and wood
piles. Outside and surrounding the homestead were the enclosed arable
and grass fields of the portion of the demesne which may be called the
home farm, a kitchen garden, and probably a vineyard, then common in
England. The garden of the manor house would not have a large variety
of vegetables; some onions, leeks, mustard, peas, perhaps cabbage; and
apples, pears, cherries, probably damsons, plums,[45] strawberries,
peaches, quinces, and mulberries. Not far off was the village or town
of the tenants, the houses all clustering close together, each house
standing in a toft or yard with some buildings, and built of wood,
turf, clay, or wattles, with only one room which the tenant shared
with his live stock, as in parts of Ireland to-day. Indeed, in some
parts of Yorkshire at the beginning of the nineteenth century this
primitive simplicity still prevailed, live stock were still kept in
the house, the floors were of clay, and the family slept in boxes
round the solitary room. Examples of farmhouses clustered together at
some distance from their respective holdings still survive, though
generally built of stone. Next the village, though not always, for
they were sometimes at a distance by the banks of a stream, were the
meadows, and right round stretched the three open arable fields,
beyond which was the common pasture and wood,[46] and, encircling all,
heath, forest, and swamp, often cutting off the manor from the rest of
the world.
The basis of the whole scheme of measurement in Domesday was the hide,
usually of 120 acres, the amount of land that could be ploughed by a
team of 8 oxen in a year; a quarter of this was the virgate, an eighth
the bovate, which would therefore supply one ox to the common team.
These teams, however, varied; on the manors of S. Paul's Cathedral in
1222 they were sometimes composed of horses and oxen, or of 6 horses
only, sometimes 10 oxen.[47]
The farming year began at Michaelmas when, in addition to the sowing
of wheat and rye, the cattle were carefully stalled and fed only on
hay and straw, for roots were in the distant future, and the corn was
threshed with the flail and winnowed by hand. In the spring, after the
ploughing of the second arable field, the vineyard, where there was
one, was set out, and the open ditches, apparently the only drainage
then known, cleansed. In May it was time to set up the temporary
fences round the meadows and arable fields, and to begin fallowing the
third field.
A valuable document, describing the duties of a reeve, gives many
interesting details of eleventh-century farming:--
'In May, June, and July one may harrow, carry out manure, set
up sheep hurdles, shear sheep, do repairs, hedge, cut wood,
weed, and make folds. In harvest one may reap; in August,
September, and in October one may mow, set woad with a dibble,
gather home many crops, thatch them and cover them over,
cleanse the folds, prepare cattle sheds and shelters ere too
severe a winter come to the farm, and also diligently prepare
the soil. In winter one should plough and in severe frosts
cleave timber, make an orchard, and do many affairs indoors,
thresh, cleave wood, put the cattle in stalls and the swine in
pigstyes, and provide a hen roost. In spring one should plough
and graft, sow beans, set a vineyard, make ditches, hew wood
for a wild deer fence; and soon after that, if the weather
permit, set madder, sow flax seed and woad seed, plant a garden
and do many things which I cannot fully enumerate that a good
steward ought to provide.'[48]
The methods of cultivation were simple. The plough, if we may judge by
contemporary illustrations, had in the eleventh century a large wheel
and very short handles.[49] In the twelfth century Neckham describes
its parts: a beam, handles, tongue, mouldboard, coulter, and
share.[50] Breaking up the clods was done by the mattock or beetle,
and harrowing was done by hand with what looks like a large rake; the
scythes of the haymakers and the sickles of the reapers were very like
those that still linger on in some districts to-day.
Here is a list of tools and implements for the homestead: an axe,
adze, bill, awl, plane, saw, spokeshave, tie hook, auger, mattock,
lever, share, coulter, goad-iron, scythe, sickle, weed-hook, spade,
shovel, woad dibble, barrow, besom, beetle, rake, fork, ladder, horse
comb, shears, fire tongs, weighing scales, and a long list of spinning
implements necessary when farmers made their own clothes. The author
wisely remarks that one ought to have coverings for wains, plough
gear, harrowing tackle, &c.; and adds another list of instruments and
utensils: a caldron, kettle, ladle, pan, crock, firedog, dishes, bowls
with handles, tubs, buckets, a churn, cheese vat, baskets, crates,
bushels, sieves, seed basket, wire sieve, hair sieve, winnowing fans,
troughs, ashwood pails, hives, honey bins, beer barrels, bathing tub,
dishes, cups, strainers, candlesticks, salt cellar, spoon case, pepper
horn, footstools, chairs, basins, lamp, lantern, leathern bottles,
comb, iron bin, fodder rack, meal ark or box, oil flask, oven rake,
dung shovel; altogether a very complete list, the compiler of which
ends by saying that the reeve ought to neglect nothing that should
prove useful, not even a mousetrap, nor even, what is less, a peg for
a hasp.
Manors in 1086 were of all sizes, from one virgate to enormous
organizations like Taunton or Leominster, containing villages by the
score and hundreds of dependent holdings.[51] The ordinary size,
however, of the Domesday manor was from four to ten hides of 120 acres
each, or say from 500 to 1,200 acres,[52] and the Manor of Segenehou
in Bedfordshire may be regarded as typical. Held by Walter brother of
Seiher it had as much land as ten ploughs could work, four plough
lands belonging to the demesne and six to the villeins, of whom there
were twenty-four, with four bordarii and three serfs; thus the
villeins had 30 acres each, the normal holding. The manorial system
was in fact a combination of large farming by the lords, and small
farming by the tenants. Nor must we compare it to an ordinary estate;
for it was a dominion within which the lord had authority over
subjects of various ranks; he was not only a proprietor but a prince
with courts of his own, the arbiter of his tenants' rights as well as
owner of the land.
One of the most striking features of the Domesday survey is the large
quantity of arable land and the small quantity of meadow, which
usually was the only land whence they obtained their hay, for the
common pasture cannot often have been mown.[53] Indeed, it is
difficult to understand how they fed their stock in hard winters.
According to the returns, in many counties more acres were ploughed in
1086 than to-day; in some twice as much. In Somerset in 1086 there
were 577,000 acres of arable; in 1907, 178,967. In Gloucestershire, in
1086, 589,000 acres; in 1907, 238,456.[54] These are extreme
instances; but the preponderance of arable is startling, even if we
allow for the recent conversion of arable to pasture on account of the
low price of corn. Between the eleventh century and the sixteenth, the
laying down of land to grass must have proceeded on a gigantic scale,
for Harrison tells us that in his day England was mainly a grazing
country. No wonder Harrison's contemporaries complained of the decay
of tillage.
Mediaeval prices and statistics are, it is well known, to be taken
with great caution; but we may assume that the normal annual value of
land under cultivation in 1086 was about 2d. an acre.[55] Land indeed,
apart from the stock upon it, was worth very little: in the tenth and
eleventh centuries it appears that the hide, normally of 120 acres,
was only worth £5 to buy, apparently with the stock upon it. In the
time of Athelstan a horse was worth 120d., an ox 30d., a cow 20d., a
sheep 5d., a hog 8d., a slave £1--so that a slave was worth 8
oxen[56]; and these prices do not seem to have advanced by the
Domesday period.
According to the Pipe Roll of 1156, wheat was 1s. 6d. a quarter; but
prices then depended entirely on seasons, and we do not know whether
that was good or bad. However, many years later, in 1243 it was only
2s. a quarter at Hawsted.[57] In dear years, nearly always the result
of wet seasons, it went up enormously; in 1024 the English Chronicle
tells us the acre seed of wheat, that is about 2 bushels, sold for
4s.,[58] 3 bushels of barley for 6s. and 4 bushels of oats for 4s. In
1190 Holinshed says that, owing to a great dearth, the quarter of
wheat was 18s. 8d. The average price, however, in the twelfth century
was probably about 4s. a quarter.
In 1194 Roger of Hoveden[59] says an ox, a cow, and a plough horse
were the same price, 4s.; a sheep with fine wool 10d., with coarse
wool 6d.; a sow 12d., a boar 12d.
Sometimes prices were kept down by imports; 1258 was a bad and dear
year, 'most part of the corn rotted on the ground,' and was not all
got in till after November 1, so excessive was the wet and rain. And
upon the dearth a sore death and mortality followed for want of
necessary food to sustain the pining bodies of the poor people, who
died so thick that there were great pits made in churchyards to lay
the dead bodies in. And corn had been dearer if great store had not
come out of Almaine, but there came fifty great ships with wheat and
barley, meal and bread out of Dutchland, which greatly relieved the
poor.[60]
Were the manors as isolated as some writers have asserted? Generally
speaking, we may say the means of communication were bad and many an
estate cut off almost completely from the outside world, yet the
manors must often have been connected by waterways, and sometimes by
good roads, with other manors and with the towns. Rivers in the Middle
Ages were far more used as means of communication than to-day, and
many streams now silted up and shallow were navigable according to
Domesday. Water carriage was, as always, much cheaper than land
carriage, and corn could be carried from Henley to London for 2d. or
3d. a quarter. The roads left by the Romans, owing to the excellence
of their construction, remained in use during the Middle Ages, and
must have been a great advantage to those living near them; but the
other roads can have been little better than mud tracks, except in the
immediate vicinity of the few large towns. The keeping of the roads in
repair, one part of the _trinoda necessitas_ was imposed on all lands;
but the results often seem to have been very indifferent, and they
appear largely to have depended on chance, or the goodwill or devotion
of neighbouring landowners.[61] Perhaps they would, except in the case
of the Roman roads, have been impassable but for the fact that the
great lords and abbots were constantly visiting their scattered
estates, and therefore were interested in keeping such roads in order.
But in those days people were contented with very little, and though
Edward I enforced the general improvement of roads in 1285, in the
fourteenth century they were decaying. Parliament adjourned thrice
between 1331 and 1380 because the state of the roads kept many of the
members away. In 1353 the high road running from Temple Bar, then the
western limit of London, to Westminster was 'so full of holes and
bogs' that the traffic was dangerous for men and carriages; and a
little later all the roads near London were so bad, that carriers 'are
oftentimes In peril of losing what they bring.' What must remote
country roads have been like when these important highways were in
this state? If members of Parliament, rich men riding good horses,
could not get to London, how did the clumsy wagons and carts of the
day fare? The Church might well pity the traveller, and class him with
the sick 'and the captive among the unfortunates whom she recommended
to the daily prayers of pious souls.'[62] Rivers were mainly crossed
by ford or ferry, though there were some excellent bridges, a few of
which still remain, maintained by the _trinoda necessitas_, by gilds,
by 'indulgences' promised to benefactors, and by toll, the right to
levy which, called pontage, was often spent otherwise than on the
repair of the bridge.
A few of the old open fields still exist, and the best surviving example
of an open-field parish is that of Laxton in Nottinghamshire.[63]
Nearly half the area of the parish remains in the form of two great
arable fields, and two smaller ones which are treated as two parts of
the third field. The different holdings, freehold and leasehold,
consist in part of strips of land scattered all over these fields. The
three-course system is rigidly adhered to, first year wheat, second
year spring corn, third year fallow.
In a corner of the parish is Laxton Heath, a common covered with
coarse grass where the sheep are grazed according to a 'stint'
recently determined upon, for when it was unstinted the common was
overstocked. The commonable meadows which the parish once had were
enclosed at a date beyond anyone's recollection, though the
neighbouring parish of Eakring still has some. There are other
enclosures in the remote parts of the parish which apparently
represent the old woodland. The inconvenience of the common-field
system was extreme. South Luffenham in Rutland, not enclosed till
1879, consisted of 1,074 acres divided among twenty-two owners into
1,238 pieces. In some places furrows served to divide the lands
instead of turf balks, which were of course always being altered.
Another difficulty arose from there being no check to high winds,
which would sometimes sweep the whole of the crops belonging to
different farmers in an inextricable heap against the nearest
obstruction.
FOOTNOTES:
[1] Vinogradoff, _Growth of the Manor_, p. 18; Medley, _Constitutional
History_, p. 15.
[2] Vinogradoff, _Villeinage in England_, p. 257.
[3] Maitland, _Domesday Book and Beyond_, pp. 341 et seq.
[4] Stubbs, _Constitutional History_, §36.
[5] Vinogradoff, _English Society in the Eleventh Century_, p. 282,
says, 'As a rule it was not subject to redivision.'
[6] Cunningham, _Growth of English Industry and Commerce_, i. 42.
[7] Maitland, _op. cit._ p. 368.
[8] _Anonymous Treatise on Husbandry_, Royal Historical Society, pp.
xli. and 68. About 1230, Smyth, in his _Lives of the Berkeleys_, i.
113, says, 'At this time lay all lands in common fields, in one acre
or ridge, one man's intermixt with another.'
[9] See below.
[10] Cunningham, _Growth of English Industry and Commerce_, i. 74.
Maitland thinks the two-field system was as common as the three-field,
both in early and mediaeval times. _Domesday Book and Beyond_, p. 366.
[11] Nasse, _Agricultural Community of the Middle Ages_, p. 5. To-day
harvest generally commences about August 1, so that this, like the
growth of grapes in mediaeval times, seems to show our climate has
grown colder.
[12] Vinogradoff, _English Society in the Eleventh Century_, p. 264.
[13] Maitland, _op. cit._ p. 17.
[14] Vinogradoff, _English Society in the Eleventh Century_, p. 265.
[15] Maitland, _op. cit._ pp. 318 et seq.
[16] Vinogradoff, _English Society in the Eleventh Century_, p. 345.
[17] Vinogradoff, _English Society in the Eleventh Century_, p. 339.
[18] Maitland, _Domesday Book_, p. 110
[19] Vinogradoff, _op. cit._ p. 395.
[20] Vinogradoff, _Villeinage in England_, pp. 225 et seq.
[21] Maitland, _op. cit._ p. 23.
[22] Vinogradoff, _op. cit._ p. 433.
[23] In Domesday they number 108,500. Maitland, _Domesday Book_.
[24] Maitland, _op. cit._.
[25] Vinogradoff, _English Society in the Eleventh Century_, p. 300.
[26] _Domesday of S. Paul_, p. lxviii.
[27] Maitland, _Domesday Book_, p. 56.
[28] Cunningham, _Growth of English Industry and Commerce_, i. 166. In
some manors free tenants could sell their lands without the lord's
licence, in others not.
[29] Vinogradoff, _Villeinage in England_, p. 279.
[30] Vinogradoff, _Villeinage in England_, p. 285.
[31] Ibid. p. 246; and _English Society in the Eleventh Century_, p.
448. At the end of the eighteenth century, in default of sons, lands
in some manors in Shropshire descended to the youngest
daughter.--Bishton, _General View of the Agriculture of Shropshire_,
p. 178.
[32] Vinogradoff, _English Society in the Eleventh Century_, p. 456.
[33] Maitland, Domesday Book, p. 40.
[34] Ibid.
[35] Maitland, _Domesday Book_, p. 35.
[36] _Fleta_, c. 73.
[37] _Domesday of S. Paul_, xxxv. _Fleta_, 'an anonymous work drawn up
in the thirteenth century to assist landowners in managing their
estates' says, the reeve 'shall rise early, and have the ploughs
yoked, and then walk in the fields to see that all is right and note
if the men be idle, or if they knock off work before the day's task is
fully done.'
[38] Vinogradoff, _Villeinage in England_, p. 321.
[39] Ibid. p. 324.
[40] _Manor of Manydown_, Hampshire Record Society, p. 17. Breaking
the assize of beer meant selling it without a licence, or of bad
quality. The village pound was the consequence of the perpetual
straying of animals, and later on the vicar sometimes kept it. See
ibid. p. 104.
[41] Cunningham, _Growth of English Industry and Commerce_, i. 106.
[42] Vinogradoff, _Villeinage in England_, p. 264.
[43] Andrews, _Old English Manor_, p. 111.
[44] _Domesday of S. Paul_, p. xxxvii.
[45] Thorold Rogers, _Agriculture and Prices_, i. 17: Cunningham,
_Industry and Commerce_, i. 55: Neckham, _De Natura Rerum_, Rolls
Series, ch. clxvi. Rogers says there were no plums, but Neckham
mentions them. See also Denton, _England in the Fifteenth Century_, p.
64. Matthew Paris says the severe winter in 1257 destroyed cherries,
plums and figs. _Chron. Maj._, Rolls Series, v. 660.
[46] Woods were used as much for pasture as for cutting timber and
underwood. Not only did the pigs feed there on the mast of oak, beech,
and chestnut, but goats and horned cattle grazed on the grassy
portions.
[47] The illustrations of contemporary MSS. usually show teams in the
plough of 2 or 4 oxen, and 4 was probably the team generally used,
according to Vinogradoff, _op. cit._ p. 253. It must, of course, have
varied according to the soil. Birch, in his _Domesday_, p. 219, says
he has never found a team of 8 in contemporary illustrations. To-day
oxen can be still seen ploughing in teams of two only. However, about
a hundred years ago, when oxen were in common use, we find teams of 8,
as in Shropshire, for a single-furrow plough, 'so as to work them
easily.' Six hours a day was the usual day's work, and when more was
required one team was worked in the morning, another in the
afternoon.--_Victoria County History: Shropshire, Agriculture_. Walter
of Henley says the team stopped work at three.
[48] Cunningham, _Growth of English Industry and Commerce_, i. 570.
[49] See the excellent reproductions of the Calendar of the Cott. MSS.
in Green's _Short History of the English People_, illustrated edition,
i. 155.
[50] _De Natura Rerum_, Rolls Series, p, 280.
[51] Vinogradoff, _English Society in the Eleventh Century_, p. 307.
[52] Ibid. p. 312. Perhaps one of the most interesting features of the
smaller manors is that they were constantly being swallowed up by the
larger.
[53] As some of the common pasture was held in severalty, this may
perhaps have been mown in scarce years. Walter of Henley mentions
mowing the waste, see below, p. 34.
[54] Maitland, _Domesday Book_, 436; _Board of Agriculture Returns_,
1907.
[55] Vinogradoff, _English Society in the Eleventh Century_, p. 310;
Birch, _Domesday_, p. 183.
[56] Maitland, _Domesday Book_. 44; Cunningham, _Growth of Industry
and Commerce_, i. 171; _Domesday of S. Paul_, pp. xliii. and xci.
[57] Cullum, _History of Hawsted_, p. 181.
[58] Rolls Series, ii. 220. According to this, the price of a bushel
of wheat reckoned in modern money was £3 in that year
[59] Ibid. iii. 220.
[60] Holinshed, who is supported by William of Malmesbury in the
assertion that in time of scarcity England imported corn. Matthew
Paris, _Chron. Maj._, v. 673.
[61] Jusserand, _English Wayfaring Life_, p. 79.
[62] Jusserand, _English Wayfaring Life_, p. 89.
[63] Gilbert Slater, _The English Peasantry and the Enclosure of
Common Fields_, p. 8.
CHAPTER II
In the thirteenth century the manorial system may be said to have been
in its zenith; the description therefore of Cuxham Manor in
Oxfordshire at that date is of special interest. According to
Professor Thorold Rogers[64] there were two principal tenants, each
holding the fourth part of a military fee. The prior of Holy Trinity,
Wallingford, held a messuage, a mill, and 6 acres of land in free
alms; i.e. under no obligation or liability other than offering
prayers on behalf of the donor. A free tenant had a messuage and 3-3/4
acres, the rent of which was 3s. a year. He also had another messuage
and nine acres, for which he paid the annual rent of 1 lb. of pepper,
worth about 1s. 3d. The rector of the parish had part of a furrow,
i.e. one of the divisions of the common arable field, and paid 2d. a
year for it. Another tenant held a cottage in the demesne under the
obligation of keeping two lamps lighted in the church. Another person
was tenant-at-will of the parish mill, at a rent of 40s. a year. The
rest of the tenants were villeins or cottagers, thirteen of the former
and eight of the latter. Each of the villeins had a messuage and half
a virgate, 12 to 15 acres of arable land at least, for which his rent
was chiefly corn and labour, though there were two money payments, a
halfpenny on November 12 and a penny whenever he brewed. He had to pay
a quarter of seed wheat at Michaelmas, a peck of wheat, 4 bushels of
oats, and 3 hens on November 12, and at Christmas a cock, two hens,
and two pennyworth of bread. His labour services were to plough, sow,
and till half an acre of the lord's land, and give his work as
directed by the bailiff except on Sundays and feast days. In harvest
time he was to reap three days with one man at his own cost.
Some of these tenants held, besides their half virgates, other plots
of land for which each had to make hay for one day for the lord, with
a comrade, and received a halfpenny; also to mow, with another, three
days in harvest time, at their own charges, and another three days
when the lord fed them. After harvest six pennyworth of beer was
divided among them, each received a loaf of bread, and every evening
when work was over each reaper might carry away the largest sheaf of
corn he could lift on his sickle.
The cottagers paid from 1s. 2d. to 2s. a year for their holdings, and
were obliged to work a day or two in the hay-making, receiving
therefor a halfpenny. They also had to do from one to four days'
harvest work, during which they were fed at the lord's table. For the
rest of the year they were free labourers, tending cattle or sheep on
the common for wages or working at the various crafts usual in the
village. This manor was a small one, and contained in all twenty-four
households, numbering from sixty to seventy inhabitants.[65]
On most manors, as in Forncett,[66] which contained about 2,700 acres,
from the preponderance of arable, the chief source of income to the
lord was from the grain crops; other sources may be seen from the
following table of the lord's receipts and expenses in 1272-3:
RECEIPTS.
£ s. d.
Fixed rents 18 3 7-3/4
Farm of market 0 2 6
Chevage[67] 0 8 6
Foldage 0 3 9-1/2
Sale of works 5 13 2-3/4
Herbage 1 0 4
Hay 2 12 11
Turf, &c. 1 13 6-1/2
Underwood 5 10 2
Grain 61 12 3-1/4
Cider 1 1 11-1/4
Stock 5 3 0
Dairy 4 3 0-3/4
Pleas 14 0 0
Tallage 16 13 4
------------------
£128 2 2-3/4
EXPENSES.
£ s. d.
Rents paid and allowed 0 3 2-1/2
Ploughs and carts 2 17 4
Buildings and walls 4 5 10-1/2
Small necessaries 0 7 10-3/4
Dairy 0 4 3-1/4
Threshing 1 15 5-1/2
Meadow and autumn expenses 0 1 4
Stock 0 16 7
Bailiff 1 19 0
Steward 1 6 9-1/2
Grain 8 2 4-1/2
Expenses of acct. 1 0 8-1/2
------------------
£23 0 9-3/4
The manor was almost entirely self-sufficing; of necessity, for towns
were few and distant, and the roads to them bad. Each would have its
smith, millwright, thatcher, &c., paid generally in kind for their
services. There was little trade with the outside world, except for
salt--an invaluable article when meat had to be salted down every
autumn for winter use, since there were no roots to keep the cattle
on--and iron for some of the implements. Nearly everything was made in
the village.
The mediaeval system of tillage was compulsory; even the freeholders
could not manage their plots as they wished, because all the soil of
the township formed one whole and was managed by the entire village.
Even the lord[68] had to conform to the customs of the community. Any
other system than this, which must have been galling to the more
enterprising, was impossible, for as the various holdings lay in
unfenced strips all over the great common fields, individual
initiative was out of the question. As may be imagined, the great
number of strips all mixed together often led to great confusion,
sometimes 2 or 3 acres could not be found at all, and disputes owing
to careless measurement were frequent.
It is not surprising that the services by which the villeins paid rent
for their holdings to the lord very early began to be commuted for
money; it was much more convenient to both parties; and with this
change from a 'natural economy' to a 'money economy' the destruction
of the manorial system commenced, though it was to take centuries to
effect it.
The first money payments apparently date from as early as 900,[69]
but must then have been very few, and services were the rule in the
thirteenth and earlier centuries, though at the beginning of the
twelfth we find a great number of rent-paying tenants.[70] In the
fourteenth century money began to be more generally available, and the
process of commutation grew steadily; a process greatly accelerated by
the destruction of large numbers of tenants who paid rent in services
by the Black Death of 1348-9, which forced lords of manors to let
their lands for money or work them themselves with hired labour.
Before that visitation, however, it appears that commutation of labour
services for fixed annual payments had made very little progress.[71]
When these services were commuted for money in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries they were put at 1d. a day in winter, and 2d. a
day in summer, and rather more in harvest[72]; and we may put the
ordinary agricultural labourers' wages from 1250-1350 all the year
round at 2d. a day, and from 1350-1400 at 3d., but few were paid in
this way. Many were paid by the year, with allowances of food besides
and sometimes clothes, and many were in harvest at all events paid by
the piece. At Crondal in Hampshire in 1248 a carter by the year
received 4s., a herdsman 2s. 3d., a day a or dairymaid, 2s.[73] The
change to money payments was beneficial to both parties; it stopped
many of the dishonest practices of the lord's bailiff, apart from the
fact that farming by officials was an expensive method. It meant, too,
that religious festivals and bad weather would no longer diminish the
lord's profits; on the other hand, the tenant could devote himself
entirely to his holding free from annoying labour services.[74]
The state of agriculture at the time of Domesday was apparently very
low, judging by the small returns of manors,[75] but by the time of
Edward I it had made considerable progress. During the reign of Henry
III England had grown in opulence, and continued to do so under his
great son, who found time from his manifold tasks to encourage
agriculture and horticulture. Fruit and forest trees, shrubs and
flowers, were introduced from the continent, and we are told that the
hop flourished in the royal gardens.[76] At his death England was
prosperous, the people progressing in comfort, the population
advancing, the agricultural labourers were increasing in numbers, the
value of the land had risen and was rising. Then came a reaction from
which England did not recover for two centuries, and Harrison, who
wrote his description of England at the end of the sixteenth century,
says that many of the improvements began to be neglected in process of
time, so that from Henry IV till the latter end of Henry VII there was
little or no use for them in England, 'but they remained unknown.'
The Hundred Rolls of Edward I, which embody the results of the labours
of a commission appointed by that monarch to inquire into encroachments
on royal lands and royal jurisdiction, show clearly that there had
been since the Domesday Survey a very great growth in the rural
population, a sure sign that agriculture was flourishing; and on some
estates the number of free tenants had increased largely, but the
burdens of the villeins were not less onerous than they had been.
It was in the thirteenth century that the practice of keeping strict
and minute accounts became general, and the accounts of the bailiff of
those days would be a revelation to the bailiff of these.
At the same time we must not forget that the earliest improvements in
English agriculture were largely due to the monks, who from their
constant journeys abroad were able to bring back new plants and seeds;
while it is well known that many of the religious houses, the
Cistercians especially, who always settled in the remote country, were
most energetic farmers, their energy being materially assisted by
their wealth. It is said that the great Becket when he visited a
monastery did not disdain to labour in the field.
Among other benefits that the landed interest gained at this time was
the more easy transference of land provided, _inter alia_, by the
statute of _Quia Emptores_, which led to many tenants selling their
lands, provided the rights of the lord were preserved, and to a great
increase consequently of free tenants, many of whom had quite small
holdings.[77] The amalgamation of holdings by the more industrious and
skilful has, as we should expect, been a well-marked tendency all
through the history of English agriculture, and began early. For
instance, according to the records of S. Paul's Cathedral, John
Durant, whose ancestor in 1222 held only one virgate in 'Cadendon',
had in 1279 eight or ten at least. At 'Belchamp', Martin de Suthmere,
one of the free tenants, held 245 acres by himself and his tenants,
twenty-two in number, who rendered service to him; one of them being
de Vere, Earl of Oxford, who held 17 acres under Martin. To such a
position had the abler of the small holders of a century or so before
already pushed their way, in spite of the heavy hand of feudalism,
which did much to hinder individual initiative. At this period and
until Tudor times England, as regards the cultivated land, was
essentially a corn-growing country; the greater part of the lord's
demesne was arable, and the tillage fields of the villeins largely
exceeded their meadows. For instance, in 1285 the cultivated lands at
Hawsted in Suffolk were nearly all under the plough; in seven holdings
there were 968 acres of arable and only 40 of meadow, a proportion of
24 to 1. No doubt there was plenty of common pasture, but we cannot
call this cultivated land. The seven holdings were as follows:[78]
Acres.
Arable. Meadow. Wood.
Thomas Fitzeustace, lord of the manor 240 10 10
William Tallemache 280 12 24
Philip Noel 120 4 7
Robert de Ros 56 3 5
Walter de Stanton 80 3 1
William de Camaville 140 6 8
John Beylham 52 2 3
--- -- --
968 40 58
These were the larger tenants; among the smaller several had no meadow
at all.
We must not forget that the grazing of the tillage fields after the
crops were off was of great assistance to those who kept stock; for
there was plenty to eat on the stubbles. The wheat was cut high, the
straw often apparently left standing 18 inches or 2 feet high; weeds
of all kinds abounded, for the land was badly cleaned; and often only
the upper part of the high ridges, into which the land was thrown for
purposes of drainage, was cultivated, the lower parts being left to
natural grass.[79]
The greatest authority for the farming of the thirteenth century is
Walter of Henley, who wrote, about the middle of it, a work which held
the field as an agricultural textbook until Fitzherbert wrote in the
sixteenth century, and much of his advice is valuable to-day. There
was from his time until the days of William Marshall, who wrote five
centuries afterwards, a controversy as to the respective merits of
horses and oxen as draught animals, and it is a curious fact that the
later writer agreed with the earlier as to the superiority of oxen. 'A
plough of oxen', says Walter, 'will go as far in the year as a plough
of horses, because the malice of the ploughman will not allow the
plough of horses to go beyond their pace, no more than the plough of
oxen. Further, in very hard ground where the plough of horses will
stop, the plough of oxen will pass. And the horse costs more than the
ox, for he is obliged to have the sixth part of a bushel of oats every
night, worth a halfpenny at least, and twelve pennyworth of grass in
the summer. Besides, each week he costs more or less a penny a week in
shoeing, if he must be shod on all four feet;' which was not the
universal custom.
'But the ox has only to have 3-1/2 sheaves of oats per week (ten
sheaves yielding a bushel of oats), worth a penny, and the same amount
of grass as the horse.[80] And when the horse is old and worn out
there is nothing but his skin, but when the ox is old with ten
pennyworth of grass he shall be fit for the larder.'[81]
The labourer of the Middle Ages could not complain of lack of
holidays; Walter of Henley tells us that, besides Sundays, eight weeks
were lost in the year from holidays and other hindrances.[82]
He advises the sowing of spring seed on clay or on stony land early,
because if it is dry in March the ground will harden too much and the
stony ground become dry and open; therefore fore sow early that corn
may be nourished by winter moisture. Chalky and sandy ground need not
be sown early. At sowing, moreover, do not plough large furrows, but
little and well laid together, that the seed may fall evenly. Let your
land be cleaned and weeded after S. John's Day, June 24, for before
that is not a good time; and if thistles are cut before S. John's Day
'for every one will come two or three.' Do not sell your straw; if you
take away the least you lose much; words which many a landlord to-day
doubtless wishes were fixed in the minds of his tenants.
Manure should be mixed with earth, for it lasts only two or three
years by itself, but with earth it will last twice as long; for when
the manure and the earth are harrowed together the earth shall keep
the manure so that it cannot waste by descending in the soil, which it
is apt to do.
'Feed your working oxen before some one, and with chaff. Why? I will
tell you. Because it often happens that the oxherd steals the
provender.'
The oxen were also to be bathed, and curried when dry with a wisp of
straw, which would cause them to lick themselves.
'Change your seed every year at Michaelmas; for seed grown on other
ground will bring more profit than that which is grown on your own.'
Apparently the only drainage then practised was that of furrow and
open ditch; and we find him saying that to free your lands from too
much water, let the marshy ground be well ridged, and the water made
to run, and so the ground may be freed from water.
Here is his estimate of the cost of wheat growing[83]:
'You know surely that an acre sown with wheat takes three
ploughings, except lands which are sown yearly; and that each
ploughing is worth 6d. and the harrowing 1d., and on the acre
it is necessary to sow at least two bushels. Now two bushels at
Michaelmas are worth at least 12d., and weeding 1/2d., and
reaping 5d., and carrying in August 1d., and the straw will pay
for the threshing.'[83]
The return was wretched: 'at three times your sowing you ought to have
6 bushels, worth 3s.' The total cost is thus 3s. 1-1/2d.; and without
debiting anything for rent and manure, the loss would be 1-1/2d. an
acre.
The anonymous _Treatise on Husbandry_ of about the same date says,
however, that 'wheat ought to yield to the fifth grain, oats to the
fourth, barley to the eighth, beans and peas to the sixth.'[84] In the
years 1243-8 the average yield of wheat at Combe, Oxfordshire, was 5
bushels per acre, of barley a little over 5, oats 7. In the Manor of
Forncett, in various years from 1290 to 1306, wheat yielded about 10
bushels, oats from 12 to 16, barley 16, and peas from 4 to 12 bushels
per acre.[85]
As for the dairy, 2 cows, says Walter, should yield a wey, (2 cwt) of
cheese annually, and half a gallon of butter a week, 'if sorted out
and fed in pasture of salt marsh;' but 'in pasture of wood or in
meadows after mowing, or in stubble, it should take 3 cows for the
same.' Twenty ewes, which it was then the custom to milk, fed in
pasture of salt marsh, ought to yield the same as the 2 cows. A gallon
of butter was worth 6d., and weighed 7 lb. And the anonymous treatise
says each cow ought to yield from the day after Michaelmas until the
first kalends of May, twenty-eight weeks, 10d. more or less; and from
the first kalends of May till Michaelmas, twenty-four weeks, the milk
of a cow should be worth 3s. 6d.; and she should give also 6 stones
(14 lb. per stone) of cheese, and 'as much butter as shall make as
much cheese.'[86] It was a common practice all through the Middle
Ages, and survives in localities to-day, to let out the cows by the
year, at from 3s. to 6s. 8d. a head, often to the daya or dairymaid,
the owner supplying the food, and the lessee agreeing to restore them
in equal number and condition at the end of the term.[87] The
anonymous treatise tells us that 'if you wish to farm out your stock
you can take 4s. 6d. clear for each cow and the tithe, and for a sheep
6d. and the tithe, and a sow should bring you 6s. 6d. a year and
acquit the tithe, and each hen 9d. and the tithe; and Walter says,
'When I was bailiff the dairymaids had the geese and hens to farm, the
geese at 12d. and the hens at 3d.'
Among other information conveyed by these two treatises we learn that
the poor servants or labourers were accustomed to be fed on the
diseased sheep, salted and dried; but Walter adds, 'I do not wish you
to do this.' Nor can we point the finger of scorn at this: for in the
disastrous season of 1879 numbers of rotten sheep were sold to the
butcher and consumed by the unsuspecting public without even being
salted and dried.
He further tells us that 'you can well have 3 acres weeded for 1d.,
and an acre of meadow mown for 4d., and an acre of waste meadow for
3-1/2d. And know that 5 men can well reap and bind 2 acres a day of
each kind of corn, and where each takes 2d. a day then you must give
5d. an acre.'[88] 'One ought to thresh a quarter of wheat or rye for
2d. and a quarter of oats for 1d. A sow ought to farrow twice a year,
having each time at least 7 pigs; and each goose 5 goslings a year and
each hen 115 eggs and 7 chicks, 3 of which ought to be made capons;
and for 5 geese you must have one gander, and for 5 hens one cock.'
The laying qualities of the hen, in spite of the talk of the 200-egg
bird, were evidently as good then as to-day. In those days of
self-supporting farms it was the custom to put together the farm
implements at home, and the farmer is advised that it will be well if
he can have carters and ploughmen who should know how to work all
their own wood, though it should be necessary to pay them more.[89]
The village smith, however, seems, as we should expect, to have done
most of the iron work that was needed.[90]
These extracts have given the reader some insight into
thirteenth-century prices, prices which in the case of grain altered
very little for nearly 300 years: for instance, the average price of
wheat from 1259 to 1400 was 5s. 10-3/4d. a quarter, and from 1401 to
1540 5s. 11-3/4d.; of barley, 4s. 3-3/4d. from 1259 to 1400, 3s.
8-3/4d. from 1401 to 1540; of oats, 2s. 5-3/4d. and 2s. 2-1/4d. in the
same two periods respectively; of rye, 4s. 5d. and 4s. 7-3/4d.; and of
beans, 4s. 3-1/2d. and 3s. 9-1/4d.[91] Wheat fluctuated considerably,
being as we have seen 2s. a quarter at Hawsted in 1243 and in 1290
14s. 10d., a most exceptional price. Oxen, which were chiefly valued
as working animals, were about 13s. apiece[92]; cows, 9s. 5d. Farm
horses were of two varieties: the 'affer' or 'stott', a rough small
animal, generally worth about 13s. 5d., and the cart-horse, probably
the ancestor of our shire horses, whose average price was 19s. 4d. A
good saddle-horse fetched as much as £5. Sheep were from 1s. 2d. to
1s. 5d. each. In Hampshire in 1248 shoeing ten farm horses for the
plough for a year cost 5s.; making a gate cost 12d. As Walter of
Henley said, it cost a penny a week to shoe a horse on all four feet;
these horses must have been very roughly shod.[93] It is evident, from
what Walter of Henley says, that horses were not always shod on all
four feet, and their shoes were generally very light. The roads were
mere tracks without any metalling, so that there was little necessity
for heavy shoes; and as Professor Thorold Rogers suggests, it is quite
possible that the hoofs of our horses have become weaker by reason of
the continual paring and protection which modern shoeing involves.[94]
They weighed usually less than half a pound, and cost about 4s. a
hundred.
The most striking fact about agricultural prices at this date is the
low price of land compared with that of its products. The annual rent
of land was from 4d. to 6d.[95] an acre, and it was worth about ten
years' purchase. Consequently, a quarter of wheat was often worth more
than an acre of land, a good ox three times as much, a good cart-horse
four times, while a good war-horse was worth the fee-simple of a small
farm. A greater breadth of wheat was sown than of any other crop; but
it seems that none was ever stored except in the castles and
monasteries, for in spite of successive abundant harvests a bad season
would send the price up at once. Barley was, as now, chiefly used for
making beer, which was also made from oats and wheat, of course
without hops, which were not used till the fifteenth century; and
sometimes it was made of oats, barley, and wheat, a concoction worth
3/4d. a gallon in 1283.[96] Cider was also drunk, and was sold at
Exminster in Devonshire in 1286 at 1/2d. a gallon, and apples fetched
2d. a bushel. Thorold Rogers[97] says that wheat was the chief food of
the English labourer from the earliest times until perhaps the
seventeenth century, when the enormous prices were prohibitive; but
this statement must be taken with reserve, as must that of Mr.
Prothero[98] that rye was the bread-stuff of the peasantry. Where the
labourer's food is mentioned as part of his wages, wheat, barley, and
rye all occur, wheat and rye being often mixed together as 'mixtil';
and it is most probable that in one district wheat, in another one of
the other cereals, formed his chief bread-stuff, according to the crop
best adapted to the soil of the locality.
Walter of Henley mentions wheat as if it was the chief crop, for he
selects it as best illustrating the cost of corn-growing[99]; and from
the enormous number of entries enumerated by Thorold Rogers in his
mediaeval statistics it was apparently more grown than other cereals.
The chief meat of the lower classes then, as to-day, was bacon from
the innumerable herds of swine who roamed in the woods and wastes, but
in bad years, when food was scarce, the poor ate nuts, acorns, fern
roots, bark, and vetches.[100]
As the cattle of the Middle Ages were like the mountain cattle of
to-day, so were the sheep like many of the sheep to be seen in the
Welsh mountains; yet, unlike the cattle, an attempt seems to have been
made, judging by the high price of rams, to improve the breed; but
they were probably poor animals worth from 1s. to 1s. 6d. each, with a
small fleece weighing about a pound and a half, worth 3d. a lb. or a
little more.
FOOTNOTES:
[64] _Six Centuries of Work and Wages_, p. 39. No one can write on
English agriculture without acknowledging a deep debt to his
monumental industry, though his opinions are often open to question.
[65] Compare the account of the manors in Huntingdonshire belonging to
Romsey Abbey given in Page _End of Villeinage in England_, pp. 28 et
seq.
[66] Davenport, _A Norfolk Manor_, p. 36; and see Hall, _Pipe Roll of
Bishopric of Winchester_, p. xxv.
[67] Chevage, poll money, paid to the lord.
[68] Vinogradoff, _Villeinage in England_, p. 230.
[69] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 117.
[70] Vinogradoff, _Villeinage in England_, p. 307. On the Berkeley
estates in 1189-1220 money was so scarce with the tenants that the
rents, apparently even where services had been commuted, were commonly
paid in oxen.--Smyth, _Lives of the Berkeleys_, i. 101. In the
thirteenth century the labour services of the villeins were stricter
than in the eleventh. Vinogradoff, _op. cit._ 298.
[71] Page, _End of Villeinage_, p. 39.
[72] Thorold Rogers, _History of Agriculture and Prices_, i. 82.
[73] Hampshire Record Society, i. 64. See Appendix, i.
[74] Hasbach, _English Agricultural Labourer_, p. 14.
[75] Hallam, _Middle Ages_, iii. 361
[76] Denton, _England in the Fifteenth Century_, p. 56.
[77] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 273.
[78] Cullum, _History of Hawsted_, 1784 ed., p. 180.
[79] Ballard, _Domesday_, p. 207.
[80] Walter of Henley, Royal Historical Society, p. 12.
[81] Walter reckons the above food of the horse at 12s. 3d., and of
the ox at 3s. 1d.; but both are wrong.
[82] Ibid. p. 15.
[83] Walter of Henley, Royal Historical Society, p. 19.
[84] Walter of Henley, Royal Historical Society, p. 71.
[85] Davenport, _A Norfolk Manor_, pp. 29 et seq. See also Hall, _Pipe
Roll of the Bishopric of Winchester_, p. xxvi, which gives an average
yield of wheat over a large area in 1298-9 at 4.3 bushels per acre.
[86] Walter of Henley, Royal Historical Society, p. 77.
[87] Thorold Rogers, _Agriculture and Prices_, i. 397; _Archaeologia_,
xviii. 281.
[88] Walter of Henley, pp. 69, 75. In Lancashire, at the end of the
thirteenth century, mowing 60-1/2 acres cost 17s. 7-1/2d. _Victoria
County History, Lancashire, Agriculture_, and _Two Compoti of the
Lancashire and Cheshire Manors of Henry de Lacy_ (Cheetham Society).
[89] Walter of Henley, p. 63.
[90] _Crondall, Records_, Hampshire Record Society, i. 65.
[91] See Thorold Rogers, various tables in vol. i. of _History of
Agriculture and Prices_. Compare these with the prices on the Berkeley
estates from 1281 to 1307, omitting years of scarcity: wheat, 2s. 4d.
to 5s.; oxen, 10s. to 12s.; cows, 9s. to 10s.; bacon hogs, 5s.; fat
sheep, 1s. 6d. to 2s.; and in the early part of Edward III's reign,
wheat, 5s. 4d. to 10s.; oxen, 14s. to 24s. Other prices about the
same.--Smyth, _Lives of the Berkeleys_, i. 160.
[92] If it is true, as generally stated, that the mediaeval ox was
one-third the size of his modern successor, it is apparent that he was
a very dear animal. Cattle at this date suffered from the ravages of
wolves.
[93] _Crondall, Records_, Hampshire Record Society, i. 64.
[94] _History of Agriculture and Prices_, i. 528.
[95] Seebohm, _Transactions of Royal Historical Society_, New Series,
xvii. 288, says that rent in the fourteenth century was commonly 4d.;
the usual average is stated at 6d. an acre.
[96] _Domesday of S. Paul_, Camden Society, p. li.
[97] _History of Agriculture and Prices_, i. 26.
[98] _Pioneers of Agriculture_, p. 13.
[99] Ed. Lamond, Royal Historical Society, p. 19.
[100] Denton, _England in the Fifteenth Century_, p. 93.
CHAPTER III
STATUTE OF LABOURERS
After the death of Edward I in 1307 the progress of English
agriculture came to a standstill, and little advance was made till
after the battle of Bosworth in 1485. The weak government of Edward
II, the long French War commenced by Edward III and lasting over a
hundred years, and the Wars of the Roses, all combined to impoverish
the country. England, too, was repeatedly afflicted during the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries by pestilences, sometimes caused by
famines, sometimes coming with no apparent cause; all probably
aggravated, if not caused, by the insanitary habits of the people. The
mention of plagues, indeed, at this time is so frequent that we may
call them chronic.
At this period corn and wool were the two main products of the farmer;
corn to feed his household and labourers, and wool to put money in his
pocket, a somewhat rare thing.
English wool, which came to be called 'the flower and strength and
revenue and blood of England', was famous in very early times, and was
exported long before the Conquest. In Edgar's reign the price was
fixed by law, to prevent it getting into the hands of the foreigner
too cheaply; a wey, or weigh, was to be sold for 120d.[101] Patriotic
Englishmen asserted it was the best in the world, and Henry II, Edward
III, and Edward IV are said to have improved the Spanish breed by
presents of English sheep. Spanish wool, however, was considered the
best from the earliest times until the Peninsular War, when the Saxon
and Silesian wools deposed it from its pride of place. Smith, in his
_Memoirs of Wool_,[102] is of the opinion that England 'borrowed some
parts of its breed from thence, as it certainly did the whole from one
place or another.' Spanish wool, too, was imported into England at an
early date, the manufacture of it being carried on at Andover in
1262.[103] Yet until the fourteenth century it was not produced in
sufficient quantities to compete seriously with English wool in the
markets of the Continent; and it appears to have been the long wools,
such as those of the modern Leicester and Lincoln, from which England
chiefly derived its fame as a wool-producing country.
Our early exports went to Flanders, where weaving had been introduced
a century before the Conquest, and, in spite of the growth of the
weaving industry in England, to that country the bulk of it continued
to go, all through the Middle Ages, though in the thirteenth century a
determined effort was made to divert a larger share of English wool to
Italy.[104] During the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries the export
of wool was frequently forbidden,[105] sometimes for political
objects, but also to gain the manufacture of cloth for England by
keeping our wool from the foreigner; but these measures did not stop
the export, they only hampered it and encouraged much smuggling. It
commanded what seems to us an astonishing price, for 3d. a lb. in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries is probably equal to nearly 4s. in
our money. Its value, and the ease with which it could be packed and
carried, made it an object of great importance to the farmer. In
1337[106] we have a schedule of the price of wool in the various
counties of England, for in that year 30,000 sacks of the best wool
was ordered to be bought in various districts by merchants for Edward
III, to provide the sinews of war against France. The price for the
best wool was to be fixed by the king, his council, and the merchants;
the 'gross' wool being bought by agreement between buyer and seller.
Of the former the highest price fixed was for the wool of Hereford,
then and for long afterwards famous for its excellent quality, 12
marks the sack of 364 lb.; and the lowest for that of the northern
counties, 5 marks the sack.
Somewhat more than a century afterwards we have another similar list
of wool prices, when in 1454 the Commons petitioned the king that 'as
the wools growing within this realm have hitherto been the great
commodity, enriching, and welfare of this land, and how of late the
price is greatly decayed so that the Commons were not able to pay
their rents to their lords', the king would fix certain prices under
which wools should not be bought. The highest price fixed was for the
wool of 'Hereford, in Leominster', £13 a sack; the lowest for that of
Suffolk, £2 12s.[107]; the average being about £4 10s.
The manorial accounts of the Knights' Hospitallers, who then held land
all over England, afford valuable information as to agriculture in
1338.[108] From these we gather that the rent of arable land varied
from 2d. to 2s. an acre; but the latter sum was very exceptional, and
there are only two instances of it given, in Lincolnshire and Kent.
Most of the tillage rented for less than 1s. an acre, more than half
being at 6d. or under, and the average about 6d. On the other hand,
meadow land is seldom of less value than 2s. an acre, and in
Warwickshire, Oxfordshire, and Norfolk rose to 3s. This is one of the
numerous proofs of the great value of meadow land at a time when hay
was almost the sole winter food of stock; in some places it was eight
or ten times as valuable as the arable.[109] The pasture on the
Hospitallers' estates was divided into several and common pasture, the
former often reaching 1s. an acre and sometimes 2s., the latter rarely
exceeding 4d. The most usual way, however, of stating the value of
pasture was by reckoning the annual cost of feeding stock per head,
cows being valued at 2s., oxen at 1s., a horse at a little less than
an ox, a sheep at 1d. The reign of Edward III was a great era for
wool-growers, and the Hospitallers at Hampton in Middlesex had a flock
of 2,000 sheep whose annual produce was six sacks of wool of 364 lb.
each, worth £4 a sack, which would make the fleeces weigh a little
more than 1 lb. each. The profit of cows on one of their manors was
reckoned at 2s. per head, on another at 3s.; and the profit of 100
sheep at 20s.[110] The wages paid to the labourers for day work were
2d. a day, and we must remember that when he was paid by the day his
wages were rightly higher than when regularly employed, for day labour
was irregular and casual. The tenants about the same date obtained the
following prices[111] for some of their stock:--
£ s. d.
A good ox, alive, fatted on corn 1 4 0
" " " not on corn 16 0
A fatted cow 12 0
A two-year-old hog 3 4
A sheep and its fleece 1 8
A fatted sheep, shorn 1 2
" goose 0 3
Hens, each[112] 0 2
20 eggs 0 1
In the middle of the fourteenth century occurred the famous Black
Death, the worst infliction that has ever visited England. Its story
is too well known for repetition, and it suffices to say that it was
like the bubonic plague in the East of to-day: it raged in 1348-9, and
killed from one-third to one-half of the people.[113] It is said to
have effected more important economic results than any other event in
English history. It is probable that the prices of labour were rising
before this terrible calamity; the dreadful famine of 1315-6,[114]
followed by pestilence, when wheat went up to 26s. a quarter, and
according to the contemporary chroniclers, in some cases much higher,
destroyed a large number of the population, and other plagues had done
their share to make labour scarce, but after the Black Death the
advance was strongly marked. It also accelerated the break-up of the
manorial system. A large number of the free labourers were swept away,
and their labour lost to the lord of the manor; the services of the
villeins were largely diminished from the same cause; many of the
tenants, both free and unfree, were dead, and the land thrown on the
lord's hands. Flocks and herds were wandering about over the country
because there was no one to tend them. In short, most manors were in a
state of anarchy, and their lords on the verge of ruin. It is not to
be wondered at, therefore, that they immediately adopted strong
measures to save themselves and their property and, no doubt they
thought, the whole country. Englishmen had by this time learnt to turn
to Parliament to remedy their ills, but as the plague was still raging
a proclamation was issued of which the preamble states that wages had
already gone up greatly. 'Many, seeing the necessity of masters and
great scarcity of servants, will not serve unless they get excessive
wages', and it is, therefore, hard to till the land. Every one under
the age of 60, it was ordered, free or villein, who can work, and has
no other means of livelihood, is not to refuse to work for any one who
offers the accustomed wages; no labourer is to receive more wages than
he did before the plague, and none are to give more wages under severe
penalties. But besides regulating wages, the proclamation also insists
on reasonable prices for food and the necessaries of life: it was a
fair attempt not only to protect the landlords but the labourers also,
by keeping both wages and prices at their former rate, so that its
object was not tyrannous as has been stated.[115] It was at once
disregarded, a fate which met many of the proclamations and statutes
of the Middle Ages, which often seem to have been regarded as mere
pious aspirations.
Accordingly, the Statute of 1351, 25 Edw. III, Stat. 2, c. 1, states
that the servants had paid no regard to the ordinance regulating
wages, 'but to their ease and singular covetise do withdraw themselves
unless they have livery and wages to the double or treble of that they
were wont to take'. Accordingly, it was again laid down that they were
to take liveries and wages as before the Black Death, and 'where wheat
was wont to be given they shall take for the bushel 10d. (6s. 8d. a
quarter),[116] or wheat at the will of the giver. And that they be
hired to serve by the whole year or by other usual terms, and not by
the day, and that none pay in the time of sarcling (weeding) or
hay-making but a penny a day, and a mower of meadows for the acre 5d.,
or by the day 5d., and reapers of corn in the first week of August
2d., and the second 3d., without meat or drink.' And none were to take
for the threshing of a quarter of wheat or rye more than 2d., and for
the quarter of beans, peas, and oats more than 1d. These prices are
certainly difficult to understand. Hay-making has usually been paid
for at a rate above the ordinary, because of the longer hours; and
here we find the price fixed at half the usual wages, while mowing is
five times as much, and double the price paid for reaping, though they
were normally about the same price.[117]
It is interesting to learn from the statute that there was a
considerable migration of labourers at this date for the harvest, from
Stafford, Lancaster, Derby, Craven, the Marches of Wales and Scotland,
and other places.
Such was the first attempt made to control the labourers' wages by the
legislature, and like other legislation of the kind it failed in its
object, though the attempt was honestly made; and if the rate of wages
fixed was somewhat low, its inequity was far surpassed by the
exorbitance of the labourers' demands.[118] It was an endeavour to set
aside economic laws, and its futility was rendered more certain by the
depreciation of the coinage in 1351, which led to an advance in
prices, and compelled the labourers to persevere in their demands for
higher wages.[119]
Both wages and prices, except those of grain, continued to increase,
and labour services were now largely commuted for money payments,[120]
with the result that the manorial system began to break up rapidly.
Owing to the dearth of labourers for hire, and the loss of many of the
services of their villeins, the lords found it very hard to farm their
demesne lands. It should be remembered, too, that an additional
hardship from which they suffered at this time was that the quit rents
paid to them in lieu of services by tenants who had already become
free were, owing to the rise in prices, very much depreciated. Their
chief remedy was to let their demesne lands. The condition of the
Manor of Forncett in Norfolk well illustrates the changes that were
now going on. There, in the period 1272-1307, there were many free
tenants as well as villeins, and the holdings of the latter were
small, usually only 5 acres. It is also to be noticed that in no year
were all the labour services actually performed, some were always sold
for money. Yet in the period named there was not much progress in the
general commutation of services for money payments, and the same was
the case in the manors, whose records between 1325 and 1350 Mr. Page
examined for his _End of Villeinage in England_.[121] The reaping and
binding of the entire grain crop of the demesne at Forncett was done
by the tenants exclusively, without the aid of any hired labour.[122]
However, in the period 1307-1376 the manor underwent a great change.
The economic position of the villeins, the administration of the
demesne, and the whole organization of the manor were revolutionized.
Much of the tenants' land had reverted to the lord, partly by the
deaths in the great pestilence, partly because tenants had left the
manor; they had run away and left their burdensome holdings in order
to get high wages as free labourers. This of course led to a
diminution of labour rents, so the landlord let most of the demesne
for a term of years,[123] a process which went on all over England;
and thus we have the origin of the modern tenant farmer. A fact of
much importance in connexion with the Peasants' Revolt, soon to take
place, was that the average money rent of land per acre in Forncett in
1378 was 10d., while the labour rents for land, where they were still
paid by villeins who had not commuted or run away, were, owing to the
rise in the value of labour, worth two or three times this. We cannot
wonder that the poor villeins were profoundly discontented.
On this manor, as on others, some of the villeins, in spite of the
many disadvantages under which they lay, managed to accumulate some
little wealth. In 1378 and in 1410 one bond tenant had two messuages
and 78 acres of land; in 1441 another died seized of 5 messuages and
52 acres; some had a number of servants in their households, but the
majority were very poor. There are several instances of bondmen
fleeing from the manor; and the officers of the manor failed to catch
them. This was common in other manors, and the 'withdrawal' of
villeins played a considerable part in the disappearance of serfdom
and the break-up of the system.[124] The following table shows the
gradual disappearance of villeins in the Manor of Forncett:
In 1400 the servile families who had land numbered 16
1500 " " " 8
1525 " " " 5
1550 " " " 3
1575 " " " 0
There is no event of greater importance in the agrarian history of
England, or which has led to more important consequences, than the
dissolution of this community in the cultivation of the land, which
had been in use so long, and the establishment of the complete
independence and separation of one property from another.[125] As soon
as the manorial system began to give way, and men to have a free hand,
the substitution of large for small holdings set in with fresh vigour,
for we have already seen that it had begun. It was one of the chief
causes of the stagnation of agriculture in the Middle Ages that it lay
under the heavy hand of feudalism, by which individualism was checked
and hindered. Every one had his allotted position on the land, and it
was hard to get out of it, though some exceptional men did so; as a
rule there was no chance of striking out a new line for oneself. The
villein was bound to the lord, and no lord would willingly surrender
his services. There could be little improvement in farming when the
custom of the manor and the collective ownership of the teams bound
all to the same system of farming.[126] In fact, agriculture under
feudalism suffered from many of the evils of socialism.
But, though hard hit, the old system was to endure for many
generations, and the modern triumvirate of landlord, tenant, and
labourer was not completely established in England until the era of
the first Reform Bill.
FOOTNOTES:
[101] Cunningham, _Growth of English Industry and Commerce_, i. 130. A
weigh in the Middle Ages was 182 lbs., or half a sack.
[102] Second edition, i. 50 n. See also Burnley, _History of Wool_, p.
17.
[103] Gross, _Gild Merchant_, ii. 4. It is from the Spanish merino,
crossed with Leicesters and Southdowns, that the vast Australian
flocks of to-day are descended.
[104] Cunningham, _op. cit._ i. 628.
[105] Ashley, _Early History of English Woollen Industry_, p. 34.
[106] _Calendar of Close Rolls_, 1337-9, pp. 148-9.
[107] _Rolls of Parliament_, v. 275.
[108] _The Hospitallers in England_, Camden Society.
[109] Denton, _England in the Fifteenth Century_, p. 147.
[110] _Hospitallers in England_, p. xxvi.
[111] Ibid. pp. 1, li.
[112] Poultry-keeping was wellnigh universal, judging by the number of
rents paid in fowls and eggs.
[113] 1348 seems also to have been an excessively rainy year. The wet
season was very disastrous to live stock; according to the accounts of
the manors of Christ Church, Canterbury, about this time (_Historical
MSS. Commission, 5th Report_, 444) there died of the murrain on their
estates 257 oxen, 511 cows, 4,585 sheep. Murrain was the name given to
all diseases of stock in the Middle Ages, and is of constant
occurrence in old records.
[114] The cause of this as usual was incessant rain during the greater
part of the summer; the chronicles of the time say that not only were
the crops very short but those that did grow were diseased and yielded
no nourishment. The 'murrain' was so deadly to oxen and sheep that,
according to Walsingham, dogs and ravens eating them dropped down
dead.
[115] See Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 335. Also in an age
when the idea of Competitive price had not yet been evolved, and when
regulation by authority was the custom, it was natural and right that
the Government in such a crisis should try to check the demands of
both labourers and producers, which went far beyond what employers or
consumers could pay. Putnam, _Enforcement of the Statute of
Labourers_, 220.
[116] The average price of wheat in 1351 was 10s. 2-1/2d., which went
down to 7s. 2d. next year, and 4s. 2-1/2d. the year after; but judging
by the ineffectiveness of the statute to reduce wages, it probably had
little effect in causing this fall.
[117] See Appendix I.
[118] Putnam, _op. cit._, 221. The statute for the first ten years,
however, kept wages from ascending as high as might have been the
case.
[119] McPherson, _Annals of Commerce_, i. 543, says that as the plague
diminished the number of employers as well as labourers, the demand
for labour could not have been much greater than before, and would
have had little effect on the rate of if Edward III had not debased
the coinage. But if the owners did decrease the lands would only
accumulate in fewer hands, and would still require cultivation.
[120] Page, _End of Villeinage_, pp. 59 et seq.
[121] Ibid. p. 44.
[122] _Transactions_, Royal Historical Society, New Series, xiv. 123.
[123] This had been done before, but was now much more frequent.
Hasbach, _op. cit._ p. 17.
[124] 'After the Black Death the flight of villeins was extremely
common.'--Page, _op. cit._, p. 40.
[125] Nasse, _Agricultural Community of the Middle Ages_, p. 1.
[126] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 137.
CHAPTER IV
The castles of the great landowners have been so often described that
there is no need to do this again. The popular idea of a baron of the
Middle Ages is of a man who when he was not fighting was jousting or
hunting. Such were, no doubt, his chief recreations; so fond was he of
hunting, indeed, that his own broad lands were not enough, and he was
a frequent trespasser on those of others; the records of the time are
full of cases which show that poaching was quite a fashionable
amusement among the upper classes. But among the barons were many men
who, like their successors to-day, did their duty as landlords. Of one
of the Lords of Berkeley in the fourteenth century, it was said he was
'sometyme in husbandry at home, sometyme at sport in the field,
sometyme in the campe, sometyme in the Court and Council of State,
with that promptness and celerity that his body might have bene
believed to be ubiquitary'. Many of them were farmers on a very large
scale, though they might not have so much time to devote to it as
those excellent landlords the monks.
Thomas Lord Berkeley, who held the Berkeley estates from 1326 to 1361,
farmed the demesnes of a quantity of manors, as was the custom, and
kept thereon great flocks of sheep, ranging from 300 to 1,500 on each
manor.[127] The stock of the Bishop of Winchester, by an inquisition
taken at his death in 1367, amounted to 127 draught horses, 1,556 head
of black cattle, and 12,104 sheep and lambs. Almost every manor had
one or two pigeon houses, and the number of pigeons reared is
astonishing; from one manor Lord Berkeley obtained 2,151 pigeons in a
single year. No one but the lord was allowed to keep them, and they
were one of the chief grievances of the villeins, who saw their seed
devoured by these pests without redress. Their dung, too, was one of
the most valued manures. Lord Berkeley, like other landlords, went
often in progress from one of his manors and farmhouses to another,
making his stay at each of them for one or two nights, overseeing and
directing the husbandry. The castle of the great noble consumed an
enormous amount of food in the course of the year; from two manors on
the Berkeley estate came to the 'standinghouse' of the lord in twelve
months, 17,000 eggs, 1,008 pigeons, 91 capons, 192 hens, 288 ducks,
388 chickens, 194 pigs, 45 calves, 315 quarters of wheat, 304 quarters
of oats; and from several other manors came the like or greater store,
besides goats, sheep, oxen, butter, cheese, nuts, honey, &c.[128] Even
the lavish hospitality of the lords, and the great number of their
retainers, must have had some difficulty in disposing of these huge
supplies.
The examining of their bailiff's accounts must have taken a
considerable portion of the landlord's time, for those of each manor
were kept most minutely, and set forth, among other items, 'in what
sort he husbanded' the demesne farms, 'what sorts of cattle he kept in
them, and what kinds of graine he yearly sowed according to the
quality and condition of the ground, and how those kinds of graine
each second or third yeare were exchanged or brought from one manor to
another as the vale corne into an upland soyle, and contrarily'. And
we are told incidentally he 'set with hand, not sowed his beanes'. He
was also accustomed to move his live stock from one manor to another,
as they needed it.
The accounts also stated what days' works were due from each tenant
according to the season of the year, and at the end of each year there
was a careful valuation of live and dead stock.[129]
The difference
between the smaller gentry and the more important yeomen[130] who
farmed their own land must have been very slight. No doubt both of
them were very rough and ignorant men, who knew a great deal about the
cultivation of their land and very little about anything else. We may
be sure that the ordinary house of both was generally of wood; as
there is no stone in many parts of England, and bricks were not
reintroduced till the fourteenth century and spread slowly. Even in
Elizabeth's reign, Harrison[131] tells us that 'the ancient houses of
our gentry are yet for the most part of strong timber', and he even
thinks that houses made of oak were luxurious, for in times past men
had been contented with houses of willow, plum, and elm, but now
nothing but oak was good enough; and he quaintly says that the men who
lived in the willow houses were as tough as oak, and those who lived
in the oak as soft as willow. There are very few mansions left of the
time before Edward III, for being of timber they naturally decayed.
In a lease, dated 1152, of a manor house belonging to S. Paul's
Cathedral,[132] is a description of a manor house which contained a
hall 35 feet long, 30 feet broad, and 22 feet high; that is, 11 feet
to the tie beam and 11 feet from that to the ridge board; showing that
the roof was open and that there were no upper rooms. There was a
chamber between the hall and the thalamus or inner room which was 12
feet long, 17 feet broad, and 17 feet high, the roof being open as in
the hall; and the thalamus was 22 feet long, 16 feet broad, and 18
feet high. About the same date the Manor house of Thorp was larger,
and contained a hall, a chamber, tresantia (apparently part of the
hall or chamber separated by a screen to form an antechamber), two
private rooms, a kitchen, brew-house, malt-house, dairy, ox shed, and
three small hen-houses.
The ordinary manor house of the Middle Ages contained three rooms at
least, of mean aspect, the floor even of the hall, which was the
principal eating and sleeping room, being of dirt; and when there was
an upper room or solar added, which began to be done at the end of the
twelfth century,[133] access to it was often obtained by an outside
staircase.
If the manor house belonged to the owner of many manors, it was
sometimes inhabited by his bailiff.
The barns on the demesnes were often as important buildings as the
manor houses; one at Wickham, belonging to the canons of S. Paul's[134]
in the twelfth century, was 55 feet long, 13 feet high from the floor
to the principal beam, and 10-1/2 feet more to the ridge board; the
breadth between the pillars was 19-1/2 feet, and on each side it had a
wing or aisle 6-1/2 feet wide and 6-1/2 feet high. The amount of corn
in the barn was often scored on the door-posts.[135] In the manor
houses chimneys rarely existed, the fire being made in the middle of
the hall. Even in the early seventeenth century in Cheshire there were
no chimneys in the farmhouses, and there the oxen were kept under the
same roof as the farmer and his family.[136] When chimneys did come in
they were not much thought of. 'Now we have chimneys our tenderlings
complain of rheums, catarrhs, and poses (colds);' for the smoke not
only hardened the timbers, but was said by Harrison to be an excellent
medicine for man. Instead of glass there was much lattice, and that
made either of wicker or fine rifts of oak in checkerwise, and horn
was also used. Beds, of course, were a luxury, the owner of the manor,
his guests, and retainers flung themselves down on the hall floor
after supper and all slept together, though sometimes rough mattresses
were brought in.
Furniture was rude and scanty. In 1150 the farm implements and
household furniture on the Manor of 'Waleton' was valued and consisted
of 4 carts, 3 baskets, a basket used in winnowing corn, a pair of
millstones, 10 tubs, 4 barrels, 2 boilers of lead with stoves, 2
wooden bowls, 3 three-legged tables, 20 dishes or platters, 2
tablecloths worth 6d., 6 metal bowls, half a load of the invaluable
salt, 2 axes, a table with trestles (the usual form of table), and 5
beehives made of rushes.[137] These articles were handed down from one
generation to another, and in a lease made 150 years afterwards of the
same manor most of them reappear. The greater part of the furniture,
until the fifteenth century, was most likely made by migratory
workmen, who travelled from village to village; for except the rudest
pieces it was beyond the village carpenter, and shops there were none.
It is not to be expected that when the master lived in this manner the
lot of the labourer was a very good one. His home was miserably poor,
generally of 'wattle and dab', sometimes wholly of mud and clay; many
with only one room for all purposes. A bill is still in existence for
a house, if it can be called one, built in 1306 for two labourers by
Queen's College, Oxford, which cost 20s. in all, and was a mere hovel
without floor, ceiling, or chimney.[138] Their wretched houses appear
to have been built on the bare earth, and unfloored. Perhaps as time
went on a rude upper storey was added, the floor of which was made of
rough poles or hurdles and was reached by a ladder. The furniture was
miserably poor; a few pots and pans, cups and dishes, and some tools
would exhaust the list.[139] The goods and chattels of a landless
labourer in 1431 consisted of a dish, an adze, a brass pot, 2 plates,
2 augers, an axe, a three-legged stool, and a barrel.[140] Englishmen
of all classes were hopelessly dirty in their habits; even till the
sixteenth century they were noted above other countries for the
profuseness of their diet and their unclean ways. Erasmus spoke of the
floor of his house as inconceivably filthy. To save fuel, the
labourer's family in the cold season all lay huddled in a heap on the
floor, 'pleasantly and hot', as Barclay the poet tells us; and if he
ever had a bed it was a bundle of fern or straw thrown down, with his
cloak as a coverlet, though thus he was just as well off as his social
superiors, for with them the loose cloak of the day was a common
covering for the night. He was constantly exposed to disease, for
sanitary precautions were ignored; at the entrance of his hovel was a
huge heap of decaying refuse, poisoning air and water. Even in the
sixteenth century a foreigner noticed that 'the peasants dwell in
small huts and pile up their refuse out of doors in heaps so high that
you cannot see their houses'.[141] Diseased animals were constantly
eaten, vegetables were few, and in the winter there was no fresh meat
for any one, except game and rabbits and, for the well-to-do, fish,
but we may doubt if the peasant got any but salt fish. The consequence
was that leprosy and kindred ailments were common; and we do not
wonder that plagues were frequent and slew the people like flies. The
peasants' food consisted largely of corn. In the bailiff's accounts of
the Manor of Woodstock in 1242, six servants at Handborough received
41-1/2 bushels of corn each, 2 ox herds at Combe received the same, and
4 servants at Bladon had 36 bushels each. In 1274 at Bosham, and in
1288 at Stoughton in Sussex, the allowance was the same.[142] The
writer of the anonymous _Treatise on Husbandry_ says that in his time,
the thirteenth century, the average annual allowance of corn to a
labourer was 36 bushels.[143] Fish, too, seem to have formed a large
portion of his diet; all classes ate enormous quantities of fish,
before the Reformation, in Lent and on fast days, and the labourer was
constantly given salt herrings as part of his pay. In 1359, at
Hawsted, the villeins when working were allowed 2 herrings a day, some
milk, a loaf, and some drink.[144] Eden[145] says his food consisted
of a few fish, principally herrings, a loaf of bread, and some beer;
but we must certainly add pork, which was his stand-by then as
now.[146] In the fourteenth century, at all events, there were three
kinds of bread in use--white bread, ration bread, and black bread; and
it was no doubt the latter that the peasant ate.[147] Clothing was
dear and cloth coarse, the most valuable personal property consisting
of clothing and metal vessels. Shirts were the subject of charitable
gifts.[148] By 37 Edw. III, c. 14, labourers were not to wear any
manner of cloth but 'blanket and russet wool of 12d.' and girdles of
linen. If they wore anything more extravagant it was forfeited to the
king.
To the labourer of modern times the life of his forefathers would have
seemed unutterably dull. No books, no newspapers, no change of scene
by cheap excursions, no village school, no politics. The very
cultivation of the soil by the old three-course system was monotonous.
But there were bright spots in his existence: the village church not
only afforded him the consolations of religion but also entertainments
and society. Religion in the Middle Ages was a part of the people's
daily life, and its influence permeated even their amusements.
Miracles and mystery plays, played in the churches and churchyards,
were a common feature in village life; as were the church ales or
parish meetings held four or five times a year, where cakes and beer
were purchased from the churchwarden and consumed for the good of the
parish. Indeed, there can be no doubt that there was much more
sociability than to-day, in the country at least. Labour was lightened
by the co-operation of the common fields; common shepherds and
herdsmen watched the sheep and cattle of the different tenants, 'a
common mill ground the corn, a common oven baked the bread, a common
smith worked at a common forge.' His existence, moreover, was
enlivened by a considerable number of sports. A statute at the end of
the fourteenth century (12 Ric. II, c. 6) says he was fond of playing
at tennis(!), football, quoits, dice, casting the stone, and other
games, which this statute forbad him, and enacted that he should use
his bow and arrows on Sundays and holidays instead of such idle sport.
This is a foretaste of the modern sentiment that seeks to wean him
from watching football matches and take to miniature rifle clubs. He
was also, like some of his successors, fond of poaching, though he
appears to have been rash enough to indulge in it by day. 13 Ric. II,
c. 13, says he was prone on holidays, when good Christian people be in
church hearing divine service, to go hunting with greyhounds and other
dogs, in the parks and warrens of the lord and of others, and
sometimes these hunts were turned into conferences and conspiracies,'
for to rise and disobey their allegiance', such as preceded the
Peasants' Revolt of 1381; and accordingly no one who did not own lands
worth 40s. a year was to keep a dog to hunt, or ferrets other
'engines': the first game law on the English statute book.
FOOTNOTES:
[127] Smyth, _Lives of the Berkeleys_, i. 302. No doubt the riches of
the Berkeleys were considerably greater than those of many of the
barons.
[128] _Lives of the Berkeleys_, i. 166. There is no reason to doubt
Smyth, as he wrote with the original accounts before him.
[129] _Lives of the Berkeleys_, i. 156.
[130] The yeoman is said to have made his appearance in the fifteenth
century, but the small freeholders of the manor before that date were
to all intents and purposes yeomen. No doubt, as trade grew in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries successful tradesmen bought small
freeholds in the country and swelled the numbers of yeomen.
[131] Harrison, _Description of Britain_, F.J. Furnivall edn., p. 337.
[132] _Domesday of S. Paul_, Camden Society, p. 129.
[133] Turner, _Domestic Architecture_, i. 59.
[134] _Domesday of S. Paul_, p. 123.
[135] _Historical MSS. Commission Report_, v. 444.
[136] Ormerod, _History of Cheshire_, i. 129.
[137] _Domesday of S. Paul_, p. xcvii.
[138] Denton, _England in the Fifteenth Century_.
[139] Eden, _State of the Poor_, i. 21.
[140] See Cullum, _History of Hawsted_.
[141] Harrison, _Description of Britain_, Appendix ii, lxxxi. In some
manors, however, there were careful regulations for public health.
According to the Durham _Halmote Rolls_, published by the Surtees
Society, village officials watched over the water supply, prevented
the fouling of streams; bye-laws were enacted as to the regulation of
the common place for clothes washing, and the times for emptying and
cleansing ponds and mill-dams.
[142] Ballard, _Domesday_, Antiquary Series, p. 209.
[143] Walter of Henley, Royal Historical Society, p. 75.
[144] Cullum, _Hawsted_, 1784 ed., p. 182.
[145] _State of the Poor_, i. 15.
[146] Thorold Rogers, _History of Agriculture and Prices_, i. 32.
[147] See _Knights Hospitallers in England_, Camden Society,
Introduction.
[148] Thorold Rogers, _op. cit._ i. 66.
CHAPTER V
REVOLT.--FURTHER ATTEMPTS TO REGULATE WAGES.--A HARVEST HOME.--
BEGINNING OF THE CORN LAWS.--SOME SURREY MANORS
We have seen that the landlords' profits were seriously diminished by
the Black Death, and they cast about them for new ways of increasing
their incomes. Arable land had been until now largely in excess of
pasture, the cultivation of corn was the chief object of agriculture,
bread forming a much larger proportion of men's diet than now. This
began to change. Much of the land was laid down to grass, and there
was a steady increase in sheep farming; thus commenced that revolution
in farming which in the sixteenth century led Harrison to say that
England was mainly a stock-raising country. The lords also let a
considerable amount of their demesne land on leases for years. 'Then
began the times to alter' says Smyth of the Lord Berkeley of the end
of the fourteenth century, 'and hee with them, and he began to tack
other men's cattle on his pasture by the week, month, and quarter, and
to sell his meadow grounds by the acre. And in the time of Henry IV
still more and more was let, and in succeeding times. As for the days'
works of the copyhold tenants, they also were turned into money.'[149]
Such leases had been used long before this, but this is the date of
their great increase. In the thirteenth century a lease of 2 acres of
arable land in Nowton, Suffolk, let the land at 6d. an acre per annum
for a term of six years.[150] It contains no clauses about
cultivation; the landlord warrants the said 2 acres to the tenant, and
the tenant agrees to give them up at the end of the term freely and
peaceably. The deed was indented, sealed, and witnessed by several
persons. The impoverished landlords also let much of their land on
stock and land leases. The custom of stocking the tenants' land was a
very ancient one: the lord had always found the oxen for the plough
teams of the villeins. In the leases of the manors of S. Paul's in the
twelfth century the tenant for life received stock both live and dead,
which when he entered was carefully enumerated in the lease, and at
the end of the tenancy he had to leave behind the same quantity.[151]
It was a common practice also, before the Black Death, for the lord to
let out cows and sheep at so much per head per annum.[152] The stock
and land lease therefore was no novelty. In 1410 there is a lease of
the demesne lands at Hawsted by which the landlord kept the manor
house and its appurtenances in his own hands, the tenant apparently
having the farm buildings, which he was to keep in repair. He was to
receive at the beginning of the term 20 cows and one bull, worth 9s.
each; 4 stotts, worth 10s. each; and 4 oxen, worth 13s. 4d. each;
which, or their value in money, were to be delivered up at the end of
the term. The tenant was also to leave at the end of the lease as many
acres well ploughed, sown, and manured as he found at the beginning.
Otherwise the landlord was not to interfere with the cultivation. If
the rent or any part thereof was in arrear for a fortnight after the
two fixed days for payment, the landlord might distrain; and if for a
month, he might re-enter: and both parties bound themselves to forfeit
the then huge sum of £100 upon the violation of any clause of the
lease.[153] There is a lease[154] of a subsequent date (the twentieth
year of Henry VIII), but one which well illustrates the custom now so
prevalent, granted by the Prior of the Monastery of Lathe in Somerset
to William Pole of Combe, Edith his wife, and Thomas his son, for
their lives. With the land went 360 wethers. For the land they paid 16
quarters of best wheat, 'purelye thressyd and wynowed,' 22 quarters of
best barley, and were to carry 4 loads of wood and fatten one ox for
the prior yearly; the ox to be fattened in stall with the best hay,
the only way then known of fattening oxen. For the flock of wethers
they paid £6 yearly. The tenants were bound to keep hedges, ditches,
and gates in repair. Also they were bound by a 'writing obligatory' in
the sum of £100 to deliver up the wether flock whole and sound, 'not
rotten, banyd,[155] nor otherwise diseased.' The consequence of the
spread of leases was that the portion of the demesne lands which the
lords farmed themselves dwindled greatly, or it was turned from arable
into grass. Stock and land leases survived in some parts till the
beginning of the eighteenth century, when it was still the custom for
the landlord to stock the land and receive half the crop for
rent.[156] According to the _Domesday of S. Paul_, in the thirteenth
century, a survey of eighteen manors containing 24,000 acres showed
three-eighths of the land in demesne, the rest in the hands of the
tenants. In 1359 the lord of the principal manor at Hawsted held in
his own hand 572 acres of arable land, worth 4d. to 6d. an acre rent,
and 50 acres of meadow, worth 2s. an acre.[157] He had also pasture
for 24 cows, which was considered worth 36s. a year, and for 12 horses
and 12 oxen worth 48s. a year, with 40 acres of wood, estimated at 1s.
an acre. In 1387, however, the arable land had decreased to 320 acres,
but the stock had increased, and now numbered 4 cart horses, 6 stotts
or smaller horses, 10 oxen, 1 bull, 26 cows, 6 heifers, 6 calves, 92
wethers, 20 hoggerells or two-year-old sheep, 1 gander, 4 geese, 30
capons, 26 hens, and only one cock. The dairy of 26 cows was let out,
according to the custom of the time, for £8 a year; and we are told
that the oxen were fed on oats, and shod in the winter only.
But if the position of the lords was severely affected by the great
pestilence that of the villeins was also. The villein himself was
becoming a copyholder; in the thirteenth century the nature of his
holding had been written on the court roll, before long he was given a
copy of the roll, and by the fifteenth century he was a
copyholder.[158] There was, too, a new spirit abroad in this century
of disorganization and reform, which stirred even the villeins with a
desire for better conditions of life. These men, thus rising to a more
assured position and animated by new hopes, saw all round them hired
labourers obtaining, in spite of the Statute of Labourers, double the
amount of wages they had formerly received, while they were bound down
to the same services as before. The advance in prices was further
increased by the king's issuing in 1351 an entirely new coinage, of
the same fineness but of less weight than the old; so that the demands
of the labourers after the Black Death were largely justified by the
depreciation in the currency.[159] There had also arisen at this time,
owing to the increase in the wealth of the country, a new class of
landlords who did not care for the old system[160]; and it is probably
these men who are meant by the statute I Ric. II, c. 6, which
complains that the villeins daily withdrew their services to their
lords at the instigation of various counsellors and abettors, who made
it appear by 'colour of certain exemplifications made out of the Book
of Domesday' that they were discharged from their services, and
moreover gathered themselves in great routs and agreed to aid each
other in resisting their lords, so that justices were appointed to
check this evil. But there were other 'counsellors and abettors' of
the Peasants' Revolt than the new landlords. One of its most
interesting features to modern readers is its thorough organization.
Travelling agents and agitators like John Ball were all over the
country, money was subscribed and collected, and everything was ripe
for the great rising of 1381, which was brought to a head by the bad
grading of the poll tax of King Richard. It has been said that the
chief grievance of the villeins was that the lords of manors were
attempting to reimpose commuted services, but judging by the petition
to the King when he met them at Mile-end there can be no doubt that
the chief grievance was the continuance of existing services. 'We
will', said they, 'that ye make us free for ever, and that we be
called no more bond, or so reputed.' Also, as Walsingham says,[161]
they were careful to destroy the rolls and ancient records whereby
their services were fixed, and to put to death persons learned in the
law.
As every one knows, the revolt was a failure; and whether it
ultimately helped much to extinguish serfdom is doubtful. It probably,
like the pestilence, accelerated a movement which had been for some
time in progress and was inevitable. There is ample evidence to prove
that there was a very general continuance of predial services after
the revolt, though they went on rapidly decreasing. One of the chief
methods adopted by the villeins to gain their freedom was desertion,
and so common did this become that apparently the mere threat of
desertion enabled the villein to obtain almost any concession from his
lord, who was afraid lest his land should be utterly deserted. The
result was that by the middle of the fifteenth century the abolition
of labour services was approaching completion.[162] It lingered on,
and Fitzherbert lamented in Elizabeth's reign the continuance of
villeinage as a disgrace to England; but it had then nearly
disappeared, and was unheard of after the reign of James I.[163]
Seven years after the Peasants' Revolt another attempt was made to
regulate agricultural wages by the statute 12 Ric. II, c. 4, which
stated that 'the hires of the said servants and labourers have not
been put on certainty before this time', though we have seen that the
Act of 1351 tried to settle wages. In the preamble it is said that the
statute was enacted because labourers 'have refused for a long season
to work without outrageous and excessive hire', and owing to the
scarcity of labourers 'husbands' could not pay their rents, a sentence
which shows the general use of money rents.
The wages were as follows, apparently with food:--
s. d.
A bailiff annually, and clothing once a year 13 4
A master hind, without clothing 10 0
A carter, " " 10 0
A shepherd, " " 10 0
An ox or cow herd " " 6 8
Swine herd or female labourer, without clothing 6 0
A plough driver, without clothing 7 0
The farm servants' food would be worth considerably more than the
actual cash he received; a quarter of wheat, barley, and rye mixed
every nine weeks was no unusual allowance, which at 4s. 4d. would be
worth about 25s. a year. He would also have his harvest allowance,
though the statute above forbids any perquisites, worth about 3s., and
sometimes it was accompanied by the gift of a pig, some beer, or some
herrings.[164] His wife also, at a time when women did the same work
as the men, could earn 1d. a day, and his boy perhaps 1/2d. If his
wages were wholly paid in money, we may say that in the last half of
the fourteenth century the ordinary labourer earned 3d. a day, so that
as corn and pork, his chief food, had not risen at all, he was much
better off than in the preceding 100 years.
Cullum, in his invaluable _History of Hawsted_, gives us a picture of
harvesting on the demesne lands in 1389 which shows an extraordinarily
busy scene. There were 200 acres of all kinds of corn to be gathered
in, and over 300 people took part; though apparently such a crowd was
only collected for the two principal days of the harvest, and it must
be remembered that the towns were emptied into the country at this
important season. The number of people for one day comprised a carter,
ploughman, head reaper, cook, baker, brewer, shepherd, daya
(dairymaid); 221 hired reapers; 44 pitchers, stackers, and reapers
(not hired, evidently villeins paying their rents by work); 22 other
reapers, hired for goodwill (_de amore_); and 20 customary tenants.
This small army of men consumed 22 bushels of wheat, 8 pennyworth of
beer, and 41 bushels of malt, worth 18s. 9-1/2d.; meat to the value of
9s. 11-1/2d.; fish and herrings, 5s. 1d.; cheese, butter, milk, and
eggs, 8s. 3-1/2d.; oatmeal, 5d. salt, 3d.; pepper and saffron, 10d.,
the latter apparently introduced into England in the time of Edward
III, and much used for cooking and medicine, but it gradually went out
of fashion, and by the end of the eighteenth century was only
cultivated in one or two counties, notably Essex where Saffron Walden
recalls its use; candles, 6d.; and 5 pairs of gloves 10d.[165]
The presentation of gloves was a common custom in England; and these
would be presented as a sign of good husbandry, as in the case of the
rural bridegroom in the account of Queen Elizabeth's visit to
Kenilworth who wore gloves to show he was a good farmer. Tusser bids
the farmer give gloves to his reapers. The custom was still observed
at Hawsted in 1784, and in Eden's time, 1797, the bursars of New
College, Oxford, presented each of their tenants with two pairs, which
the recipients displayed on the following Sunday at church by
conspicuously hanging their hands over the pew to show their
neighbours they had paid their rent. In this account of the Hawsted
harvest the large number of hired men and the few customary tenants is
noteworthy as a sign of the times, for before the Black Death the
harvest work on the demesne was the special work of the latter.
In the fourteenth century the long series of corn laws was commenced
which was to agitate Englishmen for centuries, and after an apparently
final settlement in 1846 to reappear in our day.[166] It was the
policy of Edward III to make food plentiful and cheap for the whole
nation, without special regard to the agricultural interest: and by 34
Edw. III, c. 20, the export of corn to any foreign part except Calais
and Gascony, then British possessions, or to certain places which the
king might permit, was forbidden. Richard II, however, reversed this
policy in answer to the complaints of agriculturists whose rents were
falling,[167] and endeavoured to encourage the farmer and especially
the corn-grower; for he saw the landlords turning their attention to
sheep instead of corn, owing to the high price of labour. Accordingly,
to give the corn-growers a wider market, he allowed his subjects by
the statute 17 Ric. II, c. 7, to carry corn, on paying the duties due,
to what parts they pleased, except to his enemies, subject however to
an order of the Council; and owing to the interference of the Council
the law probably became a dead letter, at all events we find it
confirmed and amended by 4 Hen. VI, c. 5.
The prohibition of export must have been a serious blow to those
counties near the sea, for it was much easier to send corn by ship to
foreign parts than over the bad roads of England to some distant
market.[168] Indeed, judging by the great and frequent discrepancy of
prices in different places at the same date, the dispatch of corn from
one inland locality to another was not very frequent. Richard also
attempted to stop the movement, which had even then set in, of the
countrymen to the growing towns, forbidding by 12 Ric. II, c. 5, those
who had served in agriculture until 12 years of age to be apprenticed
in the towns, but to 'abide in husbandry'.
One of the most unjust customs of the Middle Ages was that which bade
the tenants of manors, except those who held the _jus faldae_, fold
their sheep on the land of the lord, thus losing both the manure and
the valuable treading.[169] However, sometimes, as in Surrey, the
sheepfold was in a fixed place and the manure from it was from time to
time taken out and spread on the land.[170]
In the same district horses had been hitherto used for farm work, as
it was considered worthy of note that oxen were beginning to be added
to the horse teams. The milk of two good cows in twenty-four weeks was
considered able to make a wey of cheese, and in addition half a gallon
of butter a week; and the milk of 20 ewes was equal to that of 3 cows.
On the Manor of Flaunchford, near Reigate, the demesne land amounted
to 56 acres of arable and two meadows, but there must have been the
usual pasture in addition to keep the following head of stock: 13
cows, who in the winter were fed from the racks in the yard; 4 calves,
bought at 1s. each; 12 oxen for ploughing, whose food was oats and
hay--a very large number for 56 acres of arable, and they were
probably used on another manor; 1 stott, used for harrowing; a goat,
and a sow.
£ s. d.
In 1382 the total receipts of this manor were 8 1 9-1/2
The total expenses 7 0 5
--------------
Profit £1 1 4-1/2
==============
Among the receipts were:--
For the lord's plough, let to farmers (perhaps
this accounts for the large team of oxen kept) 6 8
14 bushels of apples 1 2
5 loads of charcoal 16 8
A cow 10 0
Among the payments:--
For keeping plough in repair, and the wages of a
blacksmith, one year by agreement 6 8
Making a new plough from the lord's timber 6
Mowing 2 acres of meadow 1 0
Making and carrying hay of ditto, with
help of lord's servants 4
Threshing wheat, peas, and tares, per quarter 4
" oats, per quarter 1-1/2
Winnowing 3 quarters of corn 1
Cutting and binding wheat and oats, per acre 6
On the Manor of Dorking the harvest lasted five weeks as a rule; the
fore feet only of oxen used for ploughing, and of heifers used for
harrowing, were shod. For washing and shearing sheep 10d. a hundred
was the price; ploughing for winter corn cost 6d. an acre, and
harrowing 1/2d. 30-1/2 acres of barley produced 41-1/2 quarters; 28
acres of oats produced 38-1/2 quarters; 13 cows were let for the
season at 5s. each. In the same reign, at Merstham, the demesne lands
of 166-1/2 acres were let on lease with all the live and dead stock,
which was valued at £22 9s. 3d., and the rent was £36 or about 4s. 4d.
an acre, an enormous price even including the stock.
FOOTNOTES:
[149] Smyth, _Lives of the Berkeleys_, ii. 5. There is no doubt the
lease system was growing in the thirteenth century. About 1240 the
writ _Quare ejecit infra terminum_ protected the person of a tenant
for a term of years, who formerly had been regarded as having no more
than a personal right enforceable by an action of covenant.
Vinogradoff, _Villeinage in England_, p. 330; but leases for lives and
not for years seem the rule at that date.
[150] Cullum, _Hawsted_, p. 175.
[151] See _Domesday of S. Paul_, Introduction.
[152] Thorold Rogers, _History of Agriculture and Prices_, i. 25.
[153] Cullum, _Hawsted_, p. 195.
[154] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 586.
[155] Banyd, afflicted with sheep rot.
[156] Eden, _State of the Poor_, i. 55.
[157] Cullum, _Hawsted_, p. 182. Another instance of the difference in
value between arable and tillage. At the inquisition of the Manor of
Great Tey in Essex, 1326, the jury found that 500 acres of arable land
was worth 6d. an acre rent, 20 acres of meadow 3s. an acre, and 10
acres of pasture 1s. an acre. _Archaeologia_, xii. 30.
[158] Medley, _Constitutional History_, p. 52.
[159] Cunningham, _op. cit._ i. 328, and 335-6.
[160] _Domesday of S. Paul_, p. lvii.
[161] _Hist. Angl._, Rolls Series, i. 455. The other political and
social causes of the revolt do not concern us here. The attempt to
minimize its agrarian importance is strange in the light of the words
and acts above mentioned.
[162] Page, _op. cit._ p. 77.
[163] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 402, 534; _Transactions
of the Royal Historical Society_, New Series, xvii. 235. Fitzherbert
probably referred more to villein status, which continued longer than
villein tenure.
[164] Thorold Rogers, _History of Agriculture and Prices_, i. 278,
288.
[165] Harrison, _Description of Britain_, p. 233, says the produce of
an acre of saffron was usually worth £20.
[166] Exportation of corn is mentioned in 1181, when a fine was paid
to the king for licence to ship corn from Norfolk and Suffolk to
Norway.--McPherson, _Annals of Commerce_, i. 345. As early as the
reign of Henry II, Henry of Huntingdon says, German silver came to buy
our most precious wool, our milk (no doubt converted into butter and
cheese), and our innumerable cattle.--Rolls Series, p. 5. In 1400, the
_Chronicle of London_ says the country was saved from dearth by the
importation of rye from Prussia.
[167] Hasbach, _op. cit._. p. 32.
[168] Lord Berkeley, about 1360, had a ship of his own for exporting
wool and corn and bringing back foreign wine and wares.--Smyth, _Lives
of the Berkeleys_, i. 365.
[169] Nasse, _Agricultural Community of the Middle Ages_, p. 66.
[170] Customs in some Surrey manors in the time of Richard II,
_Archaeologia_, xviii. 281.
CHAPTER VI
1400-1540
THE SO-CALLED 'GOLDEN AGE OF THE LABOURER' IN A PERIOD OF GENERAL
DISTRESS
In this period the average prices of grain remained almost unchanged
until the last three decades, when they began slowly and steadily to
creep up, this advance being helped to some extent by defective
harvests. In 1527, according to Holinshed it rained from April 12 to
June 3 every day or night; in May thirty hours without ceasing; and
the floods did much damage to the corn. In 1528 incessant deluges of
rain prevented the corn being sown in the spring, and grain had to be
imported from Germany. The price of wheat was a trifle higher than in
the period 1259-1400; barley, oats, and beans lower; rye higher.[171]
Oxen and cows were dearer, horses about the same, sheep a little
higher, pigs the same, poultry and eggs dearer, wool the same, cheese
and butter dearer. The price of wheat was sometimes subject to
astonishing fluctuations: in 1439 it varied from 8s. to 26s. 8d.; in
1440 from 4s. 2d. to 25s. The rent of land continued the same, arable
averaging 6d. an acre,[172] though this was partly due to the fact
that rents, although now generally paid in money, were still fixed and
customary; for the purchase value of land had now risen to twenty
years instead of twelve.[173] The art of farming hardly made any
progress, and the produce of the land was consequently about the same
or a little better than in the preceding period.[174]
At the end of the fourteenth century the ordinary wheat crop at
Hawsted was in favourable years about a quarter to the acre, but it
was often not more than 6 bushels; and this was on demesne land,
usually better tilled than non-demesne land.[175] As for the labourer,
it is well known that Thorold Rogers calls the fifteenth century his
golden age, and seeing that his days' wages, if he 'found himself',
were now 4d. and prices were hardly any higher all round than when he
earned half the money in the thirteenth century, there is much to
support his view. As to whether he was better off than the modern
labourer it is somewhat difficult to determine; as far as wages went
he certainly was, for his 4d. a day was equal to about 4s. now; it is
true that on the innumerable holidays of the Church he sometimes did
not work,[176] but no doubt he then busied himself on his bit of
common. But so many factors enter into the question of the general
material comfort of the labourer in different ages that it is almost
impossible to come to a satisfactory conclusion. Denton paints a very
gloomy picture of him at this time[177]; so does Mr. Jessop, who says,
the agricultural labourers of the fifteenth century were, compared
with those of to-day, 'more wretched in their poverty, incomparably
less prosperous in their prosperity; worse clad, worse fed, worse
housed, worse taught, worse governed; they were sufferers from
loathsome diseases, of which their descendants know nothing; the very
beasts of the field were dwarfed and stunted; the disregard of to
sell their corn at low prices to the detriment of the whole kingdom: a
typical example of the political economy of the time, which considered
the prosperity of agriculture indispensable to the welfare of the
country, even if the consumer suffered. Accordingly, it was enacted
that wheat could be exported without a licence when it was under 6s.
8d. a quarter, except to the king's enemies. On imports of corn there
had been no restriction until 1463, when 3 Edw. IV, c. 2 forbade the
import of corn when under 6s. 8d: a statute due partly to the fear
that the increase of pasture was a danger to tillage land and the
national food supply, and partly to the fact that the landed interest
had become by now fully awake to the importance of protecting
themselves by promoting the gains of the farmer.[178] It may be
doubted, however, if much wheat was imported except in emergencies at
this time, for many countries forbade export. These two statutes were
practically unaltered till 1571,[179] and by that of 1463 was
initiated the policy which held the field for nearly 400 years.
Thorold Rogers denounces the landlords for legislating with the object
of keeping up rents, but, as Mr. Cunningham has pointed out, this
ignores the fact that the land was the great fund of national wealth
from which taxation was paid; if rents therefore rose it was a gain to
the whole country, since the fund from which the revenue was drawn was
increased.[180]
In spite of the high wages of agricultural labourers, the movement
towards the towns noticed by Richard II continued. The statute 7 Hen.
IV, c. 17, asserts that there is a great scarcity of labourers in
husbandry and that gentlemen are much impoverished by the rate of
wages; the cause of the scarcity lying in the fact that many people
were becoming weavers,[181] and it therefore re-enacted 12 Ric. II,
c. 5, which ordained that no one who had been a servant in husbandry
until 12 years old should be bound apprentice, and further enacted
that no person with less than 20s. a year in land should be able to
apprentice his son. Like many other statutes of the time this seems to
have been inoperative, for we find 23 Hen. VI, c. 12 (1444), enacting
that if a servant in husbandry purposed leaving his master he was to
give him warning, and was obliged either to engage with a new one or
continue with the old. It also regulated the wages anew, those fixed
showing a substantial increase since the statute of 1388. By the
year:--
A bailiff was to have £1 3s. 4d., and 5s. worth of clothes.
A chief hind, carter, or shepherd, £1, and 4s. worth of clothes.
A common servant in husbandry, 15s., and 3s. 4d. worth of clothes.
A woman servant, 10s., and 4s. worth of clothes.
All with meat and drink.
By the day, in harvest, wages were to be:--
A mower, with meat and drink, 4d.; without, 6d.
A reaper or carter, with meat and drink, 3d.; without, 5d.
A woman or labourer, with meat and drink, 2d.; without, 4d.
In the next reign the labourer's dress was again regulated for him,
and he was forbidden to wear any cloth exceeding 2s. a yard in price,
nor any 'close hosen', apparently tight long stockings, nor any hosen
at all which cost more than 14d.[182] Yeomen and those below them were
forbidden to wear any bolsters or stuff of wool, cotton wadding, or
other stuff in their doublets, but only lining; and somewhat
gratuitously it was ordered that no one under the degree of a
gentleman should wear pikes to his shoes.
In 1455 England's Thirty Years' War, the War of the Roses, began, and
agriculture received another set back. The view that the war was a
mere faction fight between nobles and their retainers, while the rest
of the country went about their business, is somewhat exaggerated. No
doubt, the mass of Englishmen, as in the civil war of the seventeenth
century, preferred to 'sit still', as Clarendon said, but the business
of many must have been very much upset. The various armies were
compelled to obtain their supplies from the country, and with the
lawless habits of the times plundered friend and foe alike, as
Cavalier and Roundhead did afterwards; and many a farmer must have
seen all his stock driven off and his grain seized to feed the
combatants. For instance, it was said before the battle called Easter
Day Field that all the tenants of Abbot's Ripton in Huntingdonshire
were copyholders of the Abbot of Ramsey, and the northern army lay
there so long that they impoverished the country and the tenants had
to give up their copyholds through poverty.[183] The loss of life,
too, must have told heavily on a country already suffering from
frequent pestilence. It is calculated that about one-tenth of the
whole population of the country were killed in battle or died of
wounds and disease during the war; and as these must have been nearly
all men in the prime of life, it is difficult to understand how the
effect on the labour market was not more marked. The enclosing of land
for pasture farms, which we shall next have to consider, was probably
in many cases an absolute necessity, for the number of men left to
till the soil must have been seriously diminished.
FOOTNOTES:
[171] See table at end of volume. The shrinkage of prices which
occurred in the fifteenth century was due to the scarcity of precious
metals.
[172] Thorold Rogers, _History of Agriculture and Prices_, iv. 128.
The rent of arable land on Lord Derby's estate in Wirral in 1522 was a
little under 6d. a statute acre; of meadow, about 1s. 6d.--_Cheshire
Sheaf_ (Ser. 3), iv. 23.
[173] Thorold Rogers, _op. cit._ iv. 3.
[174] Thorold Rogers, _op. cit._ iv. 39.
[175] Cullum, _Hawsted_, p. 187. The amount of seed for the various
crops was, wheat 2 bushels per acre, barley 4, oats 2-1/2.
[176] By 4 Hen. IV, c. 14, labourers were to receive no hire for holy
days, or on the eves of feasts for more than half a day; but the
statute was largely disregarded.
[177] See _England in the Fifteenth Century_, p. 105: 'The undrained
neglected soil, the shallow stagnant waters which lay on the surface
of the ground, the unhealthy homes of all classes, insufficient and
unwholesome food, the abundance of stale fish eaten, and the scanty
supply of vegetables predisposed rural and town population to
disease.'
[178] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 448.
[179] McCulloch, _Commercial Dictionary_ (1852), p. 412. In 1449
Parliament had decided that all foreign merchants importing corn
should spend the money so obtained on English goods to prevent it
leaving the country.--McPherson, _Annals of Commerce_, i. 655.
[180] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 191.
[181] Much of the weaving, however, was done in rural districts.
[182] See 3 Edw. IV, c. 5; _Rot. Parl._ v. 105; 22 Edw. IV, c. 1.
[183] Cunningham, _op. cit._ i. 456.
CHAPTER VII
ENCLOSURE
We have now reached a time when the enclosure question was becoming of
paramount importance,[184] and began to cause constant anxiety to
legislators, while the writers of the day are full of it. Enclosure
was of four kinds:
1. Enclosing the common arable fields for grazing, generally
in large tracts.
2. Enclosing the same by dividing them into smaller fields,
generally of arable.
3. Enclosing the common pasture, for grazing or tillage.
4. Enclosing the common meadows or mowing grounds.
It is the first mainly, and to a less degree the third of these, which
were so frequent a source of complaint in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries; for the first, besides displacing the small holder, threw
out of employment a large number of people who had hitherto gained
their livelihood by the various work connected with tillage, and the
third deprived a large number of their common rights.
The first Enclosure Act was the Statute of Merton, passed in 1235, 20
Henry III, c. 4, which permitted lords of manors to add to their
demesnes such parts of the waste pasture and woods as were beyond the
needs of the tenants. There is evidence, however, that enclosure,
probably of waste land, was going on before this statute, as the
charter of John, by which all Devonshire except Dartmoor and Exmoor
was deforested, expressly forbids the making of hedges, a proof of
enclosure, in those two forests.[185] We may be sure that the needs of
the tenants were by an arbitrary lord estimated at a very low figure.
At the same time many proceeded in due legal form. Thomas, Lord
Berkeley, about the period of the Act reduced great quantities of
ground into enclosures by procuring many releases of common land from
freeholders.[186] His successor, Lord Maurice, was not so observant of
legality. He had a wood wherein many of his tenants and freeholders
had right of pasture. He wished to make this into a park, and treated
with them for that purpose; but things not going smoothly, he made the
wood into a park without their leave, and then treated with his
tenants, most of whom perforce fell in with his highhanded plan; those
who did not 'fell after upon his sonne with suits, in their small
comfort and less gaines.'[187] Sometimes the rich made the law aid
their covetousness, as did Roger Mortimer the paramour of the 'She
Wolf of France'. Some men had common of pasture in King's Norton Wood,
Worcestershire, who, when Mortimer enclosed part of their common land
with a dike, filled the dike up, for they were deprived of their
inheritance. Thereupon Mortimer brought an action of trespass against
them 'by means of jurors dwelling far from the said land', who were
put on the panel by his steward, who was also sheriff of the county,
and the commoners were convicted and cast in damages of £300, not
daring to appear at the time for fear of assault, or even death.[188]
Neither dared they say a word about the matter till Mortimer was dead,
when it is satisfactory to learn that Edward III gave them all their
money back save 20 marks. We are told that Lord Maurice Berkeley
consolidated much of his demesne lands, throwing together the
scattered strips and exchanging those that lay far apart from the
manor houses for those that lay near; trying evidently to get the home
farms into a ring fence as we should term it.[189] In this policy he
was followed by his successor Thomas the Second, who during his
ownership of the estate from 1281 to 1320, to the great profit of his
tenants and himself, encouraged them to make exchanges, so as to make
their lands lie in convenient parcels instead of scattered strips, by
which he raised the rent of an acre from 4d. and 6d. to 1s. 6d.[190]
There is a deed of enclosure made in the year 1250, preserved, by
which the free men of North Dichton 'appropriated and divided between
them and so kept for ever in fee all that place called Sywyneland,
with the moor,' and they were to have licence to appropriate that
place, which was common pasture (the boundaries of which are given),
'save, however, to the grantor William de Ros and his heirs' common of
pasture in a portion thereof named by bounds, with entry and exit for
beasts after the wheat is carried. The men of North Dichton were also
to have all the wood called Rouhowthwicke, and to do what they liked
with it.[191] In return they gave the lord 10 marks of silver and a
concession as regards a certain wood. It has been noticed that the
Black Death, besides causing many of the landlords to let their
demesnes, also made them turn much tillage into grass to save labour,
which had grown so dear. We have also seen that the statutes
regulating wages were of little effect, and they went on rising, so
that more land was laid down to grass. The landowners may be said to
have given up ordinary farming and turned to sheep raising.
English wool could always find a ready sale, although Spanish sheep
farming had developed greatly; and the profitable trade of growing
wool attracted the new capitalist class who had sprung up, so that
they often invested their recently made fortunes in it, buying up many
of the great estates that were scattered during the war.[192]
The increase of sheep farming was assisted by the fact that the
domestic system of the manufacture of wool, which supplanted the guild
system, led, owing to its rapid and successful growth, to a constant
and increasing demand for wool. At the same time this development of
the cloth industry helped to alleviate the evils it had itself caused
by giving employment to many whom the agricultural changes wholly or
partially deprived of work. 'It is important to remember, that where
peasant proprietorship and small farming did maintain their ground it
was largely due to the domestic industries which supplemented the
profits of agriculture.'[193]
Much of the land laid down to grass was demesne land, but many of the
common arable fields were enclosed and laid down. John Ross of Warwick
about 1460 compares the country as he knew it with the picture
presented by the Hundred Rolls in Edward I's time, showing how many
villages had been depopulated; and he mentions the inconvenience to
travellers in having to get down frequently to open the gates of
enclosed fields.[194]
Enclosure was really a sure sign of agricultural progress; nearly all
the agricultural writers from Fitzherbert onwards are agreed that
enclosed land produced much more than uninclosed. Fitzherbert, in the
first quarter of the sixteenth century, said an acre of land rented
for 6d. uninclosed was worth 8d. when enclosed. Gabriel Plattes, in
the seventeenth century, said an acre enclosed was worth four in
common. In fact, the history of enclosures is part of the history of
the great revolution in agriculture by which the manorial system was
converted into the modern system as we know it to-day of several
ownership and the triumvirate of landlord, tenant farmer, and
labourer. No one could have objected to the enclosure of waste; it was
that of the common arable fields and of the common pasture that
excited the indignation of contemporaries. They saw many of the small
holders displaced and the countryside depopulated; many of the
labourers were also thrown out of employment, for there was no need in
enclosed fields of the swineherd and shepherd and oxherd who had
tended the common flocks of the villagers in the old unfenced fields.
But much of the opposition was founded on ignorance and hatred of
change; England had been for ages mainly a corn-growing land, and,
many thought, ought to remain so. As a matter of fact, what much of
the arable land wanted was laying down to grass; it was worn out and
needed a rest. The common field system was wasteful; the land, for
instance, could never be properly ploughed, for the long narrow strips
could not be cross-ploughed, and much of it must have suffered
grievously from want of manure at a time when hardly any stock was
kept in the winter to make manure. The beneficial effect of the rest
is shown by the fact that at the end of the sixteenth century, when
some of the land came to be broken up, the produce per acre of wheat
had gone up largely.[195] Marling and liming the land, too, which had
been the salvation of much of it for centuries, had gone out partly
because of insecurity of tenure, partly because in the unsettled state
of England men knew not if they could reap any benefit therefrom; and
partly because, says Fitzherbert, men were lazier than their fathers.
There can be no doubt that enclosures were often accompanied with
great hardships and injustice. Dugdale, speaking of Stretton in
Warwickshire,[196] says that in Henry VII's time Thomas Twyford,
having begun the depopulation thereof, decaying four messuages and
three cottages whereunto 160 acres of 'errable' land belonged, sold it
to Henry Smith; which Henry, following that example, enclosed 640
acres of land more, whereby twelve messuages and four cottages fell to
ruins and eighty persons there inhabiting, being employed about
tillage and husbandry, were constrained to depart thence and live
miserably. By means whereof the church grew to such ruin that it was
of no other use than for the shelter of cattle. A sad picture, and
true of many districts, but much of the depopulation ascribed to
enclosures was due to the devastation of the Civil Wars.
In spite of these enclosures, which began to change the England of
open fields into the country we know of hedgerows and winding roads,
great part of the land was in a wild and uncultivated state of fen,
heath, and wood, the latter sometimes growing right up to the walls of
the towns.[197] An unbroken series of woods and fens stretched right
across England from Lincoln to the Mersey, and northwards from the
Mersey to the Solway and the Tweed; Warwickshire, Northamptonshire,
and Leicestershire were largely covered by forests, and Sherwood
Forest extended over nearly the whole of Notts. Cannock Chase was
covered with oaks, and in the forest of Needwood in Camden's time the
neighbouring gentry eagerly pursued the cheerful sport of hunting. The
great forest of Andredesweald, though much diminished, still covered a
large part of Sussex, and the Chiltern district in Bucks and
Oxfordshire was thick with woods which hid many a robber. The great
fen in the east covered 300,000 acres of land in six counties, in
spite of various efforts to reclaim the land, and was to remain in a
state of marsh and shallow water till the seventeenth century.
North and west of the great fen was Hatfield Chase, 180,000 acres
mostly swamp and bog, with here and there a strip of cultivated land,
much of which had been tilled and neglected; a great part too of
Yorkshire was swamp, heath, and forest, and of Lancashire marshes and
mosses, some of which were not drained till recent times. The best
corn-growing counties were those lying immediately to the north of
London, stretching from Suffolk to Gloucestershire, and including the
southern portions of Staffordshire and Leicestershire; Essex was a
great cheese county; Hants, Cambridgeshire, Northamptonshire, and
Bedfordshire were famous for malt, and Leicestershire for peas and
beans. The population of England in 1485 was probably from two to two
and a half millions. At the time of Domesday it was under two
millions, and from that date increased perhaps to nearly four millions
at the time of the Black Death in 1348-9, which swept away from
one-third to one-half of the people, and repeated wars and pestilences
seem to have kept it from increasing until Tudor times. Of the whole
population no fewer than eleven-twelfths were employed in
agriculture.[198]
It was sought to remedy enclosure and depopulation by legislation, and
the statute of 4 Hen. VII, c. 19, was passed, which stated in its
preamble that where in some towns (meaning townships or villages) 200
persons used to be occupied and lived by their lawful labours, now
there are occupied only two or three herdsmen, so that the residue
fall into idleness, and husbandry is greatly decayed, churches
destroyed, the bodies there buried not prayed for, the parsons and
curates wronged, and the defence of this land enfeebled and impaired;
the latter point being wisely deemed one of the most serious defects
in the new system of farming. Indeed, the encouragement of tillage was
largely prompted by the desire to see the people fed on good
home-grown corn and made strong and healthy by rural labour for the
defence of England. It therefore enacted that houses which within
three years before had been let for farms with 20 acres of tillage
land should be kept in that condition, under a penalty of forfeiting
half the profits to the king or the lord of the fee. Soon after Henry
VIII ascended the throne came another statute, 6 Hen. VIII, c. 5, that
all townships, villages, &c., decayed and turned from husbandry and
tillage into pasture, shall by the owner be rebuilt and the land made
mete for tillage within one year; and this was repeated and made
perpetual by a law of the next year.[199]
But legislation was in vain; the price of wool was now beginning to
advance so that the attraction of sheep farming was irresistible, and
laws, which asked landowners and farmers to turn from what was
profitable to what was not, were little likely to be observed,
especially as the administration of these laws was in the hands of
those whose interest it was that they should not be observed.
Their ill success, however, did not deter the Parliament from fresh
efforts. 25 Hen. VIII, c. 13, sets forth the condition of affairs in
its preamble: as many persons have accumulated into few, great
multitude of farms and great plenty of cattle, especially sheep,
putting such land as they can get into pasture, and enhanced the old
rents and raised the prices of corn, cattle, wool, and poultry almost
double, 'by reason whereof a mervaylous multitude and nombre of the
people of this realme be not able to provide drynke and clothes
necessary for themselves, but be so discoraged with myserie and
povertie that they fall dayly to thefte and robberye or pitifully dye
for hunger and colde.' So greedy and covetous were some of these
accumulators that they had as many as 24,000 sheep; and a good sheep,
that was used to be sold for 2s. 4d. or 3s. at the most, was now from
4s. to 6s.; and a stone of clothing wool, that in some shires was
accustomed to be sold for 18d. or 20d., is now 3s. 4d. to 4s.; and in
others, where it was 2s. 4d. to 3s. it is now 4s. 8d. to 5s.
It was therefore enacted that no man, with some exceptions, was to
keep more than 2,000 sheep at one time in any part of the realm,
though lambs under one year were not to count. The frequency of these
laws proves their inefficacy, and the conduct of Henry VIII was the
chief cause of it; for while Parliament was complaining of the
decrease of tillage he gave huge tracts of land taken from the
monasteries to greedy courtiers, who evicted the tenants and lived on
the profits of sheep farming.[200] For the dissolution of the
monasteries was now taking Place,[201] and the best landowners in
England, some of whom farmed their own land long after most of the lay
landlords had given it up or turned it into grass, and whose lands are
said to have fetched a higher rent than any others, were robbed and
ruined. Including the dissolution of the monasteries and the
confiscation of the chantry lands in 1549 by Edward VI, about
one-fifteenth of the land of England changed hands at this time. The
transfer of the abbey lands to Henry's favourites was very prejudicial
to farming; it was a source of serious dislocation of agricultural
industry, marked by all the inconvenience, injustice, and loss that
attends a violent transfer of property. It is probable also that many
of the monastic lands were let on stock and land leases; and the stock
was confiscated, with inevitable ruin to the tenant as well as the
landlord.[202] And not only was a serious injury wrought to
agriculture by the spoliation of a large number of landlords generally
noted for their generosity and good farming, but with the religious
houses disappeared a large number of consumers of country produce, the
amount of which may be gathered from the following list of stores of
the great Abbey of Fountains at the dissolution: 2,356 horned cattle,
1,326 sheep, 86 horses, 79 swine, and large quantities of wheat, oats,
rye, and malt, with 392 loads of hay.[203] It must indeed have seemed
to many as if the poor farmer was never to have any rest; no sooner
were the long wars over and pestilences in some sense diminished, than
the evils of enclosure and the dissolution of the monasteries came
upon him. Many ills were popularly ascribed to the fall of the
monasteries; in an old ballad in Percy's _Reliques_ one of the
characters says, in western dialect:--
'Chill tell the what, good vellowe,
Before the friers went hence,
A bushel of the best wheate
Was zold vor vorteen pence,
And vorty eggs a penny
That were both good and newe.'
NOTE.--If any further proof were needed of the constant attention
given by Parliament to agricultural matters, it would be furnished by
the Acts for the destruction of vermin.[204] Our forefathers had no
doubt that rooks did more harm than good, yearly destroying a
'wonderfull and marvelous greate quantitie of corne and graine'; and
destroying the 'covertures of thatched housery, bernes, rekes,
stakkes, and other such like'; so that all persons were to do their
best to kill them, 'on pain of a grevous amerciament'.
FOOTNOTES:
[184] Much the same tendencies were at work in other countries,
especially in Germany.
[185] Slater, _English Peasantry and Enclosure_, 248.
[186] Smyth, _Lives of the Berkeleys_, i. 113.
[187] _Cal. Pat. Rolls_, 1331, p. 127.
[188] _Lives of the Berkeleys_, i. 141.
[189] Ibid. i. 141.
[190] _Lives of the Berkeleys_, i. 160.
[191] _Historical MSS. Commission, 6th Report_, p. 359.
[192] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 379.
[193] Ashley, _English Woollen Industry_, pp. 80-1. Broadly speaking,
there are four stages in the development of industry--the family
system, the guild system, the domestic system, and the factory system.
[194] _Hist. Reg. Angl._, p. 120.
[195] Gisborne, _Agricultural Essays_, pp. 186-9.
[196] _Antiquities of Warwickshire_ 2nd ed., p. 51.
[197] Denton, _England in the Fifteenth Century_, p. 135.
[198] See Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 331; Denton,
_England in the Fifteenth Century_, p. 127.
[199] 7 Hen. VIII, c. 1.
[200] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 489.
[201] Dissolution of small monasteries, 1536; of greater, 1539-40.
[202] Thorold Rogers, _History of Agriculture and Prices_, iv. 129.
[203] Dugdale, _Monasticon_, v, 291.
[204] 24 Hen. VIII, c. 10; 8 Eliz. c. 15; 14 Eliz. c. 11; 39 Eliz. c.
18.
CHAPTER VIII
The farming of this period is portrayed for us by Fitzherbert, the
first agricultural writer of any merit since Walter of Henley in the
thirteenth century. He was one of the Justices of Common Pleas, and
had been a farmer for forty years before he wrote his books on
husbandry, and on surveying in 1523, so that he knew what he was
writing about; 'there is nothing touching husbandry contained in this
book but I have had experience thereof and proved the same.' In spite
of the increase of grazing in his time he says the 'plough is the most
necessarie instrument that an husbandman can occupy', and describes
those used in various counties; in Kent, for instance, 'they have some
go with wheeles as they do in many other places'; but the plough of
his time is apparently the same as that of Walter of Henley, and
altered little till the seventeenth century. The rudeness of it may be
judged from the fact that in some places it only cost 10d. or 1s.
though in other parts they were as much as 6s. or even 8s. He
says[205] it was too costly for a farmer to buy all his implements,
wherefore it is necessary for him to learn to make them, as he had
done in the Middle Ages before the era of ready-made implements, when
he always bought the materials and put them together at home. On the
vexed question of whether to use horses or oxen for ploughing, he says
it depends on the locality; for instance, oxen will plough in tough
clay and upon hilly ground, whereas horses will stand still; but
horses go faster than oxen on even ground and light ground, and are
'quicke for carriages, but they be far more costly to keep in winter.'
According to him, oxen had no shoes as horses had.[206] Here is his
description of a harrow: it is 'made of six final peeces of timber
called harow bulles, made either of ashe or oke; they be two yardes
long, and as much as the small of a man's leg; in every bulle are five
sharpe peeces of iron called harow tyndes, set somewhat a slope
forward.' This harrow, drawn by oxen, was good to break the big clods,
and then the horse harrow came after to break the smaller clods. It
differed slightly from the former, some having wooden tines. For
weeding corn the chief instrument 'is a pair of tongs made of wood,
and in dry weather ye must have a weeding hoke with a socket set upon
a staffe a yard long.'[207]
He recommends that grass be mown early, for the younger and greener
the grass is the softer and sweeter it will be when it is hay, and the
seeds will be in it instead of fallen out as when left late; advice
which many slovenly farmers need to-day. He does not approve of the
custom of reaping rye and wheat high up and mowing them after, but
advises that they be cut clean; barley and oats, however, should be
commonly mown. Both wheat and rye were to be sown at Michaelmas, and
were cast upon the fallow and ploughed under, two London bushels of
wheat and rye being the necessary amount of seed per acre. In spite of
his praise of the plough he allows that the sheep 'is the most
profitablest cattel that a man can have', and he gives a list of their
diseases, among the things that rot them being a grass called
sperewort, another called peny grass, while marshy ground, mildewed
grass, and grass growing upon fallow and therefore full of weeds were
all conducive to rot. The chief cause, however, is mildew, the sign of
whose presence is the honeydew on the oak leaves. In buying cattle to
feed the purchaser is to see that the hair stare not, and that the
beast lacks no teeth, has a broad rib, a thick hide, and be loose
skinned, for if it stick hard to his ribs he will not feed[208]; it
should be handled to see if it be soft on the forecrop, behind the
shoulder, on the hindermost rib upon the huck bone, and at the nache
by the tail. Among other diseases of cattle he mentions the gout,
'commonly in the hinder feet'; but he never knew a man who could find
a remedy. He was a great advocate of enclosures; for it was much
better to have several closes and pastures to put his cattle in, which
should be well quick-setted, ditched, and hedged, so as to divide
those of different ages, as this was more profitable than to have his
cattle go before the herdsman (in the common field).
It will be seen from the above that Fitzherbert made no idle boast in
saying he wrote of what he knew, and much of his advice is applicable
to-day, though the time is past for the farmer's wife to 'wynowe all
manner of cornes, to make malte, to shere corne, and in time of nede
to helpe her husbande to fyll the mucke wayne or dounge carte, dryve
the plough, lode heye, corne, and such other'; though she may go or
ride to the market 'to sel butter, cheese, milke, eggs, chekyns,
hennes, and geese.'[209] It appears that the horses of England at this
time had considerably deteriorated, for the statute 27 Hen. VIII, c.
6, mentions the great decay of the breed, the cause it is stated being
that 'in most places of this Realme little horsis and naggis of small
stature and valeu be suffered to depasture and also to covour marys
and felys of very small stature'; therefore owners and farmers of deer
parks shall keep in every such park two brood mares of 13 'hand
fulles' (hands) at least. Another statute, 32 Hen. VIII, c. 13, strove
to remedy this evil by enacting that no entire horse under 15 hands
was to feed on any forest, chase, waste, or common land.
This statute was a useful one, so also was 21 Hen. VIII, c. 8, which
forbade for three years the killing of calves between January 1 and
May 1, under a penalty of 6s. 8d., because so many had been killed by
'covetous persons' that the cattle of the country were dwindling in
number. Others, however, were merely meddlesome, and directed against
that unpopular man the dealer. For instance, owners refusing to sell
cattle at assessed prices were to answer first in the Star Chamber (25
Hen. VIII, c. 1); and by 3 and 4 Edw. VI, c. 19, no cattle were to be
bought but in open fair or market, and not to be resold then alive,
though a man might buy cattle anywhere for his own use. No person,
again, was to resell cattle within five weeks after he bought them (5
Edw. VI, c. 14); and a common drover had by the same Act to have a
licence from three justices before he could buy and sell cattle. We
may be sure that these laws were more honoured in the breach than in
the observance, as they deserved to be.
Hops were said to have been introduced from the Low Countries about
the middle of Henry VIII's reign; but there can be no doubt that this
is a mistake. It has been mentioned that they flourished in the
gardens of Edward I, and a distinguished authority[210] says the hop
may with probability be reckoned a native of Britain; but it was first
used as a salad or vegetable for the table, the young sprouts having
the flavour of asparagus and coming earlier. Hasted, the historian of
Kent, states[211] that a petition was presented to Parliament against
the hop plant in 1428 wherein it was called a 'wicked weed'. Harrison
says, 'Hops in time past were plentiful in this land, afterwards their
maintenance did cease, and now (cir. 1580) being revived where are
anie better to be found?'[212] Even then growers had to face foreign
competition, as the customs accounts prove that considerable
quantities were imported into England. In 1482 a cwt. was sold for 8s.
and 1 cwt. 21 lb. for 19s. 6d., an early example of that fluctuation
in price which has long characterized them.[213] Their average price
about this time seems to have been 14s. 1/2d. a cwt.
During the Tudor period the number of day labourers increased, largely
owing to the enclosures having deprived the small holder and commoner
of their land and rights. But judging by the statutes those paid
yearly and boarded in the farm house were still most numerous.
In 1495 the hours of labourers were first regulated by law. The
statute II Hen. VII, c. 22, says that 23 Hen. VI, c. 12,[214] was
insufficiently observed; and besides increasing wages slightly set
forth the following hours for work on the farm: the labourer was to be
at his work from the middle of March to the middle of September before
5 a.m., and have half an hour for breakfast and an hour and a half for
dinner and sleep, when sleep was allowed, that is from the middle of
May to the middle of August; when sleep was not allowed, an hour for
dinner and half an hour for his nonemete or lunch; and he was to work
till between 7 and 8 p.m. During the rest of the year he was to work
from daylight to dark. The attempt to regulate hours, which seem fair
and reasonable, no doubt met with better success than that to regulate
wages, for 6 Hen. VIII, c. 3 (1514), says the previous statutes had
been very much disregarded, and sets down the rates once more:--
A bailiff's yearly wages, with diet, were to be not more
than £1 6s. 8d., and 5s. for clothes.
A chief hind, carter, or chief shepherd, with diet, not more
than £1, and 5s. for clothes.
A common servant or labourer, with diet, not more than
16s. 8d., and 4s. for clothes.
A woman servant, with diet, not more than 10s., and 4s.
for clothes.
By the day, except in harvest, a common labourer from Easter to
Michaelmas was to have 2d. with food and drink, 4d. without; and from
Michaelmas to Easter 1-1/2d. with food and drink, and 3d. without. In
harvest:--
A mower, with food, 4d. a day; without, 6d.
A reaper, with food, 3d. a day; without, 5d.
A carter, with food, 3d.; without, 5d.
Other labourers, with food, 2-1/2d.; without, 4-1/2d.
Women, with food, 2-1/2d.; without, 4-1/2d.
FOOTNOTES:
[205] _Booke of Husbandry_ (ed. 1568), fol. 5. The surveyor of
Fitzherbert's day combined some of the duties of the modern bailiff
and land agent: he bought and sold for his employer, valued his
property, and supervised the rents.
[206] _Booke of Husbandry_ (ed. 1568), fol. vi.
[207] Ibid. fol. xv.
[208] _Booke of Husbandry_ (ed. 1568), fol. xxix.
[209] Fitzherbert adds pigs and all manner of cornes, so altogether
the farmer's wife seems to have done as much as the farmer.
[210] Sir Jas. E. Smith, _English Flora_, iv. 241.
[211] _History of Kent_ (ed. 1778), i. 123.
[212] _Description of Britain_ (Furnivall ed.), p. 325.
[213] Thorold Rogers, _History of Agriculture and Prices_, iii. 254.
[214] See above.
CHAPTER IX
1540-1600
PROGRESS AT LAST.--HOP-GROWING.--PROGRESS OF ENCLOSURE.--HARRISON'S
'DESCRIPTION'
The period we have now reached was one of steady growth in the value
of land and its products. In 1543 Henry VIII, who had given away or
squandered, in addition to the great treasure left him by his thrifty
father, all the wealth obtained from the dissolution of the
monasteries, debased the coinage in order to get more money into his
insatiable hands, and prices went up in consequence. But there were
other causes: the influx of precious metals from newly discovered
America into Europe had commenced to make itself felt, and the
population of the country began to grow steadily. Also, it must not be
forgotten that the seasons, which in the early part of the century had
been normal, were for the next sixty years frequently rainy and bad.
It is unnecessary to say that this must have largely helped to raise
the price of corn. The average price of wheat from 1540-1583 was 13s.
10-1/2d. a quarter; from 1583-1702, 39s. 0-1/2d. Corn was still
subject to extraordinary fluctuations: in 1557, Holinshed says before
harvest wheat was 53s. 4d. a quarter, malt 44s. After harvest wheat
was 5s., malt 6s. 8d., the former prices being due to a terrible
drought in England. Oxen in the period 1583-1703 were worth 75s.
instead of under £1 in the period 1400-1540. Wool was from 9d. to 1s.
a lb. instead of about 3-1/2d., and all other farm products increased
with these.[215] Hops were from 1540-1582 about 26s. 8d. a cwt., and
from 1583-1700, 82s. 9-1/2d. In 1574 Reynold Scott published the first
English treatise on hops,[216] in which he says, 'one man may well
keep 2,000 hils, upon every hil well ordered you shall have 3 lb. of
hoppes at the least, one hundred pounds of these hoppes are commonly
worth 26s. 8d., one acre of ground and the third part of one man's
labour with small cost beside, shall yield unto him that ordereth the
same well, fortie marks yearly and that for ever,' an optimistic
estimate that many growers to-day would like to see realized. 'In the
preparation of a hop garden', says the same writer, 'if your ground be
grasse, it should be first sowen with hempe or beanes which maketh the
ground melowe, destroyeth weedes, and leaveth the same in good season
for this purpose.[217] At the end of Marche, repayre to some good
garden to compound with the owner for choice rootes, which in some
places will cost 5d. an hundredth. And now you must choose the biggest
rootes you can find, such as are three or four inches about, and let
every root be nine or ten inches long, and contain three joints.'
Holes were then to be dug at least 8 feet apart, one foot square, and
one foot deep, and in each two or three roots planted and well hilled
up. Tusser, however, recommended them much closer:
'Five foot from another each hillock should stand,
As straight as a levelled line with the hand.
Let every hillock be four foot wide.
Three poles to a hillock, I pas not how long,
Shall yield the more profit set deeplie and strong.'
Three or four poles were to be set to each hill 15 or 16 feet long,
unless the ground was very rich, the poles 9 or 10 inches in
circumference at the butt, so as to last longer and stand the wind
well. After they were put up, the ground round the poles was to be
well rammed. Rushes or grass were used for tieing the hops. During
the growth of the hops, not more than two or three bines were to be
allowed to each pole; and after the first year the hills were to be
gradually raised from the alleys between the rows until, according to
the illustrations in Scott's book, they were 3 or 4 feet high, the
'greater you make your hylles the more hoppes you shall have upon
your poals'. When the time for picking came, the bines when cut were
carried to a 'floore prepared for the purpose', apparently of
hardened earth, where they were stripped into baskets, and Scott
thought that 'it is not hurtfull greatly though the smaller leaves be
mingled with the hoppes'. In wet weather the hops were to be stripped
in the house. The fire for drying hops was of wood, and some dried
their hops in the sun, both processes to us appearing very risky; as
the first would be too quick, and the latter next to impossible in
September in England. They were sometimes packed in barrels, as
Tusser tells us, 'Some close them up drie in a hogshead or vat, yet
canvas or sontage (coarse cloth) is better than that.'
By this time England had largely changed from a corn-growing to a
stock-raising country; Harrison, writing in the middle of Queen
Elizabeth's reign, says, 'the soile of Britaine is more inclined
to feeding and grazing than profitable for tillage and bearing of
corne ... and such store is there of cattle in everie place that the
fourth part of the land is scarcely manured for the provision of
graine.' But this statement seems exaggerated. We know that by
Harrison's time enclosures had affected but a small area, and the
greater part of the cultivated land was in open arable fields. The
yield of corn was now much greater than in the Middle Ages; rye or
wheat well tilled and dressed now produced 15 to 20 bushels to the
acre instead of 6 or 8, barley 36 bushels, oats 4 or 5 quarters[218],
though in the north, which was still greatly behind the rest of
England, crops were smaller. No doubt this was partly due to the
much-abused enclosures: the industrious farmer could now do what he
liked with his own, without hindrance from his lazy or unskilful
neighbour. Tusser's preference for the 'several' field is very
decided; comparing it with the 'champion' or common field he says:--
The countrie inclosed I praise
the tother delighteth me not,
There swineherd that keepeth the hog
there neetherd with cur and his horne,
There shepherd with whistle and dog
be fence to the medowe and corne,
There horse being tide on a balke
is readie with theefe for to walke,
Where all things in common doth reste
corne field with the pasture and meade,
Tho' common ye do for the best
yet what doth it stand ye in steade?
More plentie of mutton and beefe
corne butter and cheese of the best
More wealth any where (to be briefe)
more people, more handsome and prest (neat.)
Where find ye? (go search any coaste)
than there where enclosure is most.
More work for the labouring man
as well in the towne as the fielde.
For commons these commoners crie
inclosing they may not abide,
Yet some be not able to bie
a cow with her calf by her side.
Nor laie (intend) not to live by their wurke,
But thievishly loiter and lurke.
What footpaths are made and how brode
Annoiance too much to be borne,
With horse and with cattle what rode
is made thorowe erie man's come.
But the rich graziers boasted that they did not grow corn because
they could buy it cheaper in the market; and they are said to have
traded on the necessity of the poor farmer to sell at Michaelmas in
order to pay his rent, and when they had got the corn into their
hands they raised the price. The corn-dealers of the time were looked
upon with dislike by every one; many of the dearths then so frequent,
and nearly always caused by bad seasons, were ascribed to 'engrossers
buying of corn and witholding it for sale'. By a statute of 1552 the
freedom of internal corn trade was entirely suppressed, and no one
could carry corn from one part of England to another without a
licence, and any one who bought corn to sell it again was liable to
two months' imprisonment and forfeited his corn. Although we shall
see that this policy was reversed in the next century, the feeling
against corn-dealers survived for many years and was loudly
expressed during the Napoleonic war; indeed, we may doubt if it
is extinct to-day.
Many of the fruits and garden produce, which had been neglected since
the first Edward, had by now come into use again, 'not onlie among the
poor commons, I meane of melons, pompions, gourds, cucumbers,
radishes, skirets (probably a sort of carrot), parsneps, carrots,
cabbages, navewes (turnip radishes (?)), turnips,[219] and all kinds
of salad herbes, but also at the tables of delicate merchants,
gentlemen, and the nobilitie.'[220]
'Also we have most delicate apples, plummes, pears, walnuts, filberts,
&c., and those of sundrie sorts, planted within fortie years past, in
comparison of which most of the old trees are nothing worth: so have
we no less store of strange fruite, as abricotes, almonds, peaches,
figges, cornetrees (probably cornels) in noblemen's orchards. I have
seen capers, orenges, and lemmons, and heard of wild olives growing
here, besides other strange trees.'[221]
As a proof of the growth of grass in proportion to tillage between
the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries, Eden gives several
examples,[222] of which the following are significant:--
Arable. Grass.
acres. acres.
1339. 18 messuages in Norfolk had 160 60
1354. a Norfolk manor 300 59
1395. 2 messuages in Warwickshire 400 60
1560. 2 messuages in Warwickshire 600 660
1567. a Norfolk estate 200 400
1569. " manor 60 60
'Our sheepe are very excellent for sweetness of flesh, and our woolles
are preferred before those of Milesia and other places.'[223] So
thought Harrison and many English landowners and farmers too, so that
legislation was powerless to stop the spread of sheep farming. In 1517
a commission of inquiry instigated by Wolsey held inquisition on
enclosures and the decay of tillage, and it seems to have been the
only honest effort to stop the evil. It was to inquire what decays,
conversions, and park enclosures had been made since 1489, but the
result even of this attempt was small. In 1535 a fresh statute, 27
Hen. VIII, c. 22, stated that the Act limiting the number of sheep to
be kept had only been observed on lands held of the king, whereon many
houses had been rebuilt and much pasture reconverted to tillage; but
on lands holden of other lords this was not the case, therefore the
king was to have the moiety of the profits of such lands as had been
converted from tillage to pasture since 4 Hen. VII until a proper
house was built and the land returned to tillage; but the Act only
applied to fourteen counties therein enumerated. The enclosing for
sheep-runs still went on, however, often with ruthless selfishness;
houses and townships were levelled, says Sir Thomas More, and nothing
left standing except the church, which was turned into a sheep-house:
'The towns go down, the land decays,
Of corn-fields plain lays,
Great men maketh nowadays
A sheepcot of the church',
said a contemporary ballad.
Latimer wrote, 'where there were a great many householders and
inhabitants there is now but a shepherd and his dog.' 'I am sorie to
report it,' says Harrison,[224] 'but most sorrowful of all to
understand that men of great port and countenance are so far from
suffering their farmers to have anie gaine at all that they themselves
become graziers, butchers, tanners, sheepmasters, and woodmen, thereby
to enrich themselves.' The Act against pulling down farmhouses was
evaded by repairing one room for the use of a shepherd; a single
furrow was driven across a field to prove it was still under the
plough; to avoid holding illegal numbers of sheep flocks were held in
the names of sons and servants.[225] The country swarmed with heaps of
miserable paupers, 'sturdy and valiant' beggars, and thieves who,
though hanged twenty at a time on a single gallows, still infested all
the countryside, their numbers being swollen by the dissolution of the
monasteries and the breaking up of the bands of retainers kept by the
great nobles.
Rents also were rising rapidly. Latimer's account of his father's farm
is too well known to be again quoted; his opinions were shared by all
the writers of the day. Sir William Forrest, about 1540, says that
landlords now demand fourfold rents, so that the farmer has to raise
his prices in proportion, and beef and mutton were so dear that a poor
man could not 'bye a morsell'. 'Howe joyne they lordshyp to
lordshyppe, manner to manner, ferme to ferme. How do the rych men, and
especially such as be shepemongers, oppresse the king's people by
devourynge their common pastures with the shepe so that the poore are
not able to keepe a cowe, but are like to starve. And yet when was
beef ever so dere or mutton, wool now 8s. a stone.
'Now', says another, later in the century, 'I can never get a horse
shoed under 10d. or 12d., when I have also seen the common pryce was
6d. And cannot your neighbour remember that within these thirty years
I could bye the best pigge or goose that I could lay my hand on for
four pence which now costeth 12d., a good capon for 3d. or 4d., a hen
for 2d., which now costeth me double and triple.'[226]
Parliament, of course, tried to regulate the price of food; an Act of
1532, 24 Hen. VIII, c. 3, ordained that beef and pork should be 1/2d.
a lb. and mutton and veal 5/8d. a lb. The decrease in the number of
cows also received its attention; 2 and 3 Philip and Mary, c. 3,
states that forasmuch of late years a great number of persons have fed
in their pastures sheep and cattle with no regard to breeding, so that
there was great scarcity of stock, therefore for every 60 sheep kept
one milk cow shall be kept, and for every 120 sheep one calf shall be
bred, and for every 10 head of horned cattle shall be kept one milk
cow, and for every two cows so kept one calf shall be bred. The Act
was to last seven years, but 13 Eliz. c. 25 made it perpetual.
In 1549 came the rising of Robert Kett in Norfolk, the last attempt of
the English labourer to obtain redress of his wrongs by force of arms,
though Kett himself belonged to the landlord class and took the side
of the people probably by accident. The petition of grievances drawn
up by his followers aimed at diminishing the power of lords of manors
as regards enclosures, the keeping of dove-cots, and other feudal
wrongs. 'We pray', said the insurgents, 'that all bondmen may be made
free, for God made all free with His precious blood-shedding.' The
rebellion came to nothing, and some of the abuses at which it was
aimed were dying a natural death, though enclosure often acted hardly
on the poor man.
The manorial system went on steadily decaying, and by this time the
demesne lands had much diminished in area on most manors. Many parcels
had been sold to the new landlord class, who had made their fortunes
in the towns and, like most Englishmen, desired to become country
gentlemen.
Much of the demesne had been sold in small lots to well-off tradesmen,
and as the villeins had become copyholders a large part of the land
was owned or occupied by yeomen or tenant farmers, who cultivated from
20 to 150 acres. Many of the labourers also owned or rented cottages
with 4 or 5 acres attached to them. Such was the rural society at the
end of the Tudor period. The progress of enclosures helped to destroy
this, for the labourers gradually ceased to own or occupy land, farms
increased in size, the ownership of land came to be more and more the
privilege of the rich, and people flocked in increasing numbers to the
towns.[227a] In five Norfolk manors in Elizabeth's time only from
one-seventh to one-tenth was in demesne, and little of what was left
was farmed by the lord, but let to farmers on leases.[227b] On some
manors the demesne land lay in compact blocks near the manor house; on
others it was in scattered strips of various size; in others it lay in
blocks and strips. The following particulars of a manor in Norfolk
give a good picture of an estate in 1586-8, the tenants on it, their
rank, and the size of their holdings:--
Horstead with Staninghall, 2,746 acres.
The tenants with messuages in the village were:--
Acres.
1. J. Topliffe, gentleman 280
2. F. Woodhouse, Esquire 270
3. R. Ward, gentleman 265
4. H. Shreve 180
5. A. Pightling, widow 120
6. W. Rose's heirs 110
7. G. Berde 60
8. A. Thetford, gentleman 60
9. T. Pightling 60
10. R. Pightling 60
11. J. Rose 40
12. R. Lincoln 40
13. W. Jeckell 20
14. W. Bulwer 20
15. E. Newerby, gentleman 15
16. T. Barnard 12
17. E. Sparke 10
There were also 12 tenants without houses, holding from 1 to 20
acres; the demesne was 230 acres; there were two glebes containing 84
acres, and town lands of 7 acres. The waste amounted to 350 acres,
which by 1599 had all disappeared.
On this manor the houses were not collected together in a village as
usual in most parts of England, but scattered about the estate. In
two other manors the amount of waste remaining at this period was
very small, but in three others little had been 'approved' and much
consequently remained; most of the 'approvements', where made, seem
to have been of long standing, and all the enclosures made were for
tillage, not for grass as we should expect. The 350 acres of waste
that remained at Horstead in 1586-8 was enclosed in 1599 by agreement
between the lords of the manor and the tenants on the following
terms:--
1. Lords to take 80 acres in severalty.
2. Lords to reserve all rights to treasure trove, minerals,
waifs, &c., with right of entry to take the same.
3. All rights of pasture, shack, and foldage were to be
extinguished on all lands in the village.
4. The tenants were to pay an annual quit rent of £7 14s. 5d.
for their shares of the common.
Before a man enclosed he consolidated his holding by exchange, so as
to bring it into a compact parcel instead of scattered strips, a very
lengthy process; then he ploughed up the bounds between the strips;
after which he changed the direction of the ploughing, ploughing the
land crossways, a very necessary change, as it had all been ploughed
lengthways for centuries; and lastly he erected his fences: the
bounds of the strips, however, were sometimes left to show which were
freehold and which copyhold. On the other hand, there were exceptions
to the curtailment of the demesne: on an Oxfordshire manor of the
sixteenth century the greater part of the 64 yard-lands of which it
consisted had by then passed from the possession of the peasants to
the private use of the lord of the manor.[228] To each yard-land
belonged a house and farmyard, 24 to 28-3/4 acres of arable land, a
share in the commonable meadows which for each occupier came to some 8
acres, also the right to turn out 8 oxen or cows, or 6 horses and 40
sheep on to the common pasture. Probably, as in other manors in
ancient times, each occupier had a right to as much firewood as was
necessary, and timber for building purposes and fences. The arable
land lay in numerous small plots of half an acre each and less,
mingled together in a state of great confusion, and was farmed on the
four-field system--wheat, beans, oats, fallow--though 200 years before
the three-field system had been most common in the district. Many of
the common arable fields evidently often contained, in those days of
poor cultivation and inefficient drainage, patches of boggy and poor
land which were left uncultivated.[229] In the rolls of the Manor of
Scotter in Lincolnshire, in the early part of the sixteenth century,
no one was to allow his horses to depasture in the arable fields
unless they were tethered on these bad spots to prevent them wandering
into the growing corn.[230] Many of the other regulations of this
manor throw a flood of light on the farming of the day. In 1557 it was
ordered that no man should drive his cattle unyoked through the
corn-field under a penalty of 3s. 4d. Every man shall keep a
sufficient fence against his neighbour under the same penalty. No man
shall make a footpath over the corn-field, the penalty for so doing
being 4d. Every one shall both ring and yoke their swine before S.
Ellen's Day (probably May 3), under a penalty of 6s. 8d., the custom
of yoking swine to prevent them breaking fences being common until
recent times. It was the custom in some manors to sow peas in a plot
especially set apart for the poor. Another rule was that no one should
bake or brew by night for fear of burning down the flimsy houses and
buildings. The penalty for ploughing up the balks which divided the
strips, or meere (marc) furrows as they were called in Lincolnshire,
was 2d., a very light one for so serious an offence. In 1565 a penalty
of 10s. was imposed on Thomas Dawson for breaking his hemp, i.e.
separating the fibre from the bark in his large open chimney on winter
nights, a habit which the manor courts severely punished owing to the
risk of fire, for hemp refuse is very inflammable. It 1578 it was laid
down that every one was to sow the outside portion of their arable
lands, and not leave it waste for weeds to the damage of his
neighbours; and that those who were too poor to keep sheep should not
gather wool before 8 o'clock in the morning, in reference to the
custom of allowing the poor to pick refuse wool found on bushes and
thorns, and this rule was to prevent them tearing wool from the sheep
at night under that pretext. No man was to keep any beasts apart from
the herdsman, for if the herdsman did not know the animals he could
not tell them from strays. Every one was to sweep their chimney four
times a year, for fear of sparks falling on the thatch. No man was to
suffer the nests of crows or magpies in his ground, but pull them down
before May Day. In the meadows, before each man began to mow his grass
he was to mark the exact limits of his own land with 'wadsticks' or
tall rods, so that there could be no mistake as to boundaries. The
health of the community and of the live stock also received attention:
in 1583 one Pattynson was fined 1s. for allowing a 'scabbed' horse to
go on the common; dead cattle were to be buried the day after death,
and all unwholesome meat was to be buried.
Harrison praises the farmer of his day highly: 'the soyle is even now
in these oure dayes growne to be much more fruitfulle; the cause is
that our country men are grown more skilful and careful throwe
recompense of gayne.' He was also doing well by means of his skill and
care; and in spite of the raising of rents by the much-abused
landlords; for in former times 'for all their frugality they were
scarcely able to live and pay their rents on rent day without selling
a cow or a horse'. Such also used to be their poverty, that if a
farmer went to the alehouse, 'a thing greatly used in those days,' and
there, 'in a braverie to show what store he had, did caste downe his
purse and therein a noble or 6 shillings in silver unto them, it was
very likely that all the rest could not lay downe so much against it.'
And In Henry's time, though rents of £4 had increased to £40, £50, or
£100, yet the farmer generally had at the end of his term saved six or
seven years' rent, besides a 'fair garnish of pewter on his cupboard',
and odd vessels, also 'three or four feather beds, so manie coverlids
and carpets of tapestry, a silver salt, a bowle for wine, and a dozzen
of spoones to furnish up the sute'. His food consisted principally of
beef, and 'such food as the butcher selleth', mutton, veal, lamb,
pork, besides souse, brawn, bacon, fruit, fruit pies, cheese, butter,
and eggs.[231] In feasting, the husbandman or farmer exceeded,
especially at bridals, purifications of women, and such other
meetings, where 'it is incredible to tell what meat is consumed and
spent'. But, besides these, there were many poorer farmers who lived
at home 'with hard and pinching diet'. Wheaten bread was at this time
a luxury confined to the gentility, the farmer's loaf, according to
Tusser, was sometimes wheat, sometimes rye, sometimes mastlin, a
mixture of wheat and rye, though the poorer farmer on uninclosed land
ate bread made of beans.
The poor ate bread of rye or barley, and in time of dearth of beans,
peas, and oats, and sometimes acorns.[232] According to Tusser, the
labourer was allowed roast meat twice a week,
'Good plowmen looke weekly of custom and right,
For roast meate on Sundaies, and Thursdaies at night';
and Latimer calls bacon 'the necessary meate' of the labourer, and it
seems to have been his great stand-by then as now. The bread and bacon
were supplemented largely by milk and porridge.[233] The statute, 24
Hen. VIII, c. 3, says that all food, and especially beef, mutton,
pork, and veal, 'which is the common feeding of mean and poor
persons.' was too dear for them to buy, and fixed the price of beef
and pork at 1/2d. a lb. and of mutton and veal at 5/8d. a lb.; but the
statute, like others of the kind, was of little avail, and the price
of beef was in the middle of the sixteenth century about 1d. a lb. or
8d. in our money. As the average price of wheat at the same date was
14s. a quarter, or about 112s. in our money, fresh meat was
comparatively much cheaper, and it is no wonder that even the farmer
could not afford wheaten bread regularly. Moryson, writing in
Elizabeth's reign, says 'Englishmen eate barley and rye brown bread,
and prefer it to white as abiding longer in the stomeck and not so
soon digested'.[234]
A tithe dispute at North Luffenham in Rutlandshire throws considerable
light on the financial position of the various classes interested in
the land about 1576. At the trial several witnesses were examined, who
all made statements as to the amount of their worldly wealth, and it
is a noteworthy fact that even the humblest had saved something;
perhaps because there was no poor law or State pension fund to
discourage thrift.[235] Thomas Blackburne, a husbandman, who had
served his master as 'chief baylie of his husbandrie', had at the end
of a long life saved £40. Another, William Walker, eighty years of
age, during forty years of service to Mr. John Wymarke had put by £10.
Robert Sculthorp, who had at one time been a farmer, was worth £26 6s.
8d., but the size of his farm is unfortunately not told us. Roland
Wymarke, a gentleman farmer, who had farmed for forty years at North
Luffenham, was little better off than Thomas Blackburne, the baylie,
for he estimated his capital at £50. £50, however, must not be taken
as representing the average wealth of a 'gentleman', though a few
hundred pounds was then considered a considerable fortune. In 1577
Thomas Corny, a prosperous landlord at Bassingthorpe, Lincolnshire,
had a house with a hall, three parlours, seven chambers, a high
garret, maid's garret, five chambers for yeomen hinds, shepherd, &c.,
two kitchens, two larders, milk-house, brew-house, buttery, and
cellar; and it was furnished with tables, carpets, cushions, pictures,
beds, curtains, chairs, chests, and numerous kitchen and other
utensils, besides a quantity of plate, which was then looked upon not
only as a useful luxury but as a safe form of investment. The small
squire was not nearly so well off as this. In 1527 the house of John
Asfordby, who was of that degree, contained a hall, parlour, small
parlour, low parlour, a chamber over the parlour, gallery chamber,
buttery, and kitchen, and furniture was scanty, but the plate cupboard
was well filled.[236] A prosperous yeoman was often comparatively
better off than the small squire. Richard Cust, of Pinchbeck in the
same county, though his house was small, consisting only of a hall,
parlour with chamber over, kitchen with chamber over, brew-house,
milne-house (mill-house), and milk-house, was richer in furniture,
possessing a folding-table, 4 chairs, 6 cushions, 27 pieces of pewter,
10 candlesticks, 4 basins, 1 laver, 6 beds, and other articles.[237]
FOOTNOTES:
[215] See table at end, and Thorold Rogers's prices in Vol. V. of his
great work.
[216] 'A perfite platforme of a Hoppegarden', in _Arte of Gardening_,
by R. Scott, 1574.
[217] Tusser recommends that the hopyard be dug. Thomas Tusser was
born in Essex, about 1525, and died in 1580. He led a roving life,
which included a good deal of farming; but the statement that he died
poor appears to be inaccurate. Much of his advice is not very
valuable.
[218] Harrison, _Description of Britain_, p. 110.
[219] Usually grown in gardens, until the middle of the seventeenth
century. Tusser also mentions them.
[220] _Description of Britain_, ii. 324 (Furnivall ed.).
[221] Harrison, _Description of Britain_, ii. 329.
[222] _State of the Poor_, i. 48-9. Blomefield's _Norfolk_, iv. 569,
i. 51, i. 649. Dugdale, _Warwickshire_, p. 557.
[223] _Description of Britain_, iii. 5.
[224] _Description of Britain_ (ed. Furnivall), ii. 243.
[225] Froude, _History of England_, v. III.
[226] 'A compendious or brief examination of certain ordinary
complaints', quoted by Eden, _State of the Poor_, 1. 119.
[227a] _Transactions of the Royal Historical Society_ (New Series),
xix. 103.
[227b] Ibid. xi. 74 sq.
[228] Nasse, _Agricultural Community of the Middle Ages_, p. 9.
_Archaeologia_, xxxiii. 270.
[229] In the still surviving open fields at Laxton, mentioned above,
there are certain unploughed portions called 'sicks', or grassy
patches, never cultivated.--Slater, _op. cit._ p. 9.
[230] _Archaeologia_, xlvi. 374.
[231] _Description of Britain_, ii. 150.
[232] In the reign of Mary, 'the plain poor people did make very much
of acorns.' Cullum, _Hawsted_, p. 181.
[233] Eden, _State of the Poor_, i. 116.
[234] _Itinerary_, iii. 140.
[235] _Rutland Magazine_, i. 64.
[236] _Victoria County History: Lincolnshire_, ii. 331.
[237] See _Records of Cust Family_, i. 56.
CHAPTER X
1540-1600
LIVE STOCK.--FLAX.--SAFFRON.--THE POTATO. THE ASSESSMENT OF WAGES
The cattle and sheep of this period have generally been described as
poor animals, and no doubt they would seem small to us. To Jacob
Rathgib, a traveller, writing in 1592, they seemed worthy of praise:
'England has beautiful oxen and cows, with very large horns, low and
heavy and for the most part black; there is abundance of sheep and
wethers, which graze by themselves winter and summer without
shepherds.' The heaviest wethers, according to him, weighed 60 lb. and
had at the most 6 lb. of wool, a much heavier fleece than is generally
ascribed to them; others had 4 or 5 lb. Horses were abundant, and,
though low and small, were very fleet; the riding horses being
geldings and generally excellent. Immense numbers of swine were in the
country, 'larger than in any other.' Six years later another
traveller, Hentzner, noticed that the soil abounded with cattle, and
the inhabitants were more inclined to feeding than ploughing. He saw,
too, a Berkshire harvest-home: 'As we were returning to our inn (at
Windsor) we happened to meet some country people celebrating their
harvest-home, their last load of corn they crown with flowers, having
besides an image richly dressed by which perhaps they would signify
Ceres; this they keep moving about, while men and women, men and
maid-servants, riding through the streets in the cart, shout as loud
as they can till they arrive at the barn.' Harrison[238] tells us, no
doubt with patriotic bias, that 'our oxen are such as the like are not
to be found in any country of Europe both for greatness of body and
sweetness of flesh, their horns a yard between the tips.' Cows had
doubled in price in his time, from 26s. 8d. to 53s. 4d. 'Our horses
are high, but not of such huge greatness as in other places,' yet
remarkable for the easiness of their pace; and 5 or 6 cart-horses will
draw 30 cwt. a long journey, and a pack-horse will carry 4 cwt.
without any hurt,--a statement which is one more proof of the poorness
of the roads. The chief horse fairs were at 'Ripon, Newportpond,
Wolfpit, and Harborow,' where horse dealers were as great rogues as
ever. Pigeons were still the curse of the farmer, and their cotes were
called dens of thieves.
By the end of the sixteenth century, certainly by the first quarter of
the seventeenth, the villein, who in the Middle Ages had formed the
bulk of the population, had disappeared.[239] It is probable that even
at the beginning of the Tudor period the great majority of the bondmen
had become free, and that the serf then only formed one per cent. of
the population, and many of those had left the country and become
artizans in the towns, for personal serfdom had outlasted demesne
farming; though even there the heavy hand of the lord was upon them
and enforced the ancient customs.
In the sixteenth century flax was apparently grown upon most farms,
the statutes 34 Hen. VIII, c. 4, and 5 Eliz., c. 5, obliging every
person occupying 60 acres of tillage to have a quarter of an acre in
flax or hemp, and Moryson says the husbandmen wore garments of coarse
cloth made at home, so did their wives, and 'in generall' their linen
was coarse and made at home.[240]
'Good flax and good hemp to have of her own
In Maie a good housewife will see it be sowne',
sings Tusser. The statute of Henry VIII enjoined the sowing of flax
and hemp because of the great increase of idle people in the realm, to
which the numerous imports, especially linen cloth, contributed.
Saffron also was much grown, that at Saffron Walden in Essex was said
to be the best in the world, the profit from it being reckoned at £13
an acre. Its virtues were innumerable, if we may believe the
contemporary writers; it flavoured dishes, helped digestion, was good
for short wind, killed moths, helped deafness, dissolved gravel, and,
lastly, 'drunk in wine doth haste on drunkenesse.'
The most important novelty of this century was the potato, which the
colonists, sent out in 1586 by Sir Walter Raleigh, brought from
Virginia to Ireland, though it had been introduced into Europe by the
Spaniards before this. According to Gerard, the old English botanist,
it was, on its first introduction from America, only cultivated in the
gardens of the nobility and gentry as a curious exotic; and in 1606 it
occurs among the vegetables considered necessary for a nobleman's
household.[241] It is curious to find Gerard comparing it to what he
calls the 'common potato', in reality the sweet potato brought to
England by Drake and Hawkins earlier in the century. In James I's
reign the root was considered a great delicacy, and was sold to the
queen's household at 2s. a lb., an enormous price.
Like most agricultural novelties it spread very slowly, but about the
middle of the seventeenth century began to be planted out in the
fields in small patches in Lancashire, whence it spread all over the
kingdom and to France.[242] At this date it was looked upon as a very
second-rate article of food, if we may judge by the _Spectator_ (No.
232), which alludes to it as the diet of beggars. About 1690, Houghton
says, 'now they begin to spread all the kingdom over,' and recommends
them boiled or roasted and eaten with butter and sugar.[243] Eden
notes its increasing popularity during the eighteenth century, and by
his time (the end of that century) in many parts it was the staple
article of food for the poor; in Somerset the children mainly
subsisted on it, and in Devon it was made into bread. Its cultivation
on a large scale in the field did not, however, spread all over
England till the Napoleonic war, and the ignorance and prejudice
against it lasted for long; even Cobbett called it 'the lazy root,'
and whole potatoes were used for seed regardless of the number of
eyes.
In 1563 was passed the famous Act, 5 Eliz., c. 4, which Thorold Rogers
has asserted to be the commencement of a conspiracy for cheating the
English workman of his wages, to tie him to the soil, to deprive him
of hope, and to degrade him into irremediable poverty.[244] The
violence of this language is a prima facie reason for doubting the
correctness of his assertion, which on examination is found to be
grossly exaggerated. Under Richard II the justices were authorized to
fix the rate of wages, provided they did not exceed the maximum fixed
by Parliament. The Elizabethan statute abolished the maximum and left
the justices to fix reasonable rates. So far from being an attempt to
keep wages down it seems to have been an honest effort to regulate
them according to prices,[245] whereas most previous statutes had
merely reduced wages. The preamble of the Act states this clearly
enough, saying that the existing laws with regard to the hiring and
wages of servants were insufficient; chiefly because the wages 'are in
dyvers places to small and not answerable to this time respecting the
advancement of prices in all things that belong to the said servants
and labourers, the said lawes cannot conveniently without the great
greefe and burden of the poore labourer and hired man be put in due
execution.' But as several of these Acts were still beneficial it was
proposed to consolidate them into one statute in order to banish
idleness, advance husbandry, and give the labourer decent wages. It
was enacted therefore that all persons between the ages of twelve
years and sixty, not being otherwise occupied, 'nor being a gentleman
born, nor having lands of the yearly value of 40s., nor goods to the
value of £10,' should be compellable to serve in husbandry with 'any
person that keepeth husbandry' by the year, and the hours of work were
re-enacted.
The rates of wages of artificers, husbandmen, &c., were to be
ascertained yearly by the justices and the sheriff, 'if he
conveniently may,' at quarter sessions, 'calling unto them such
discrete and grave persons as they shall thinck meete and conferring
together respecting the plentie or scarcitie of the tyme and other
circumstances necessary to be considered,' and the wages fixed were to
be certified into Chancery. Then proclamations of the wages thus
determined were to be made in the cities and market towns. Every
person who gave higher wages than those established by the
proclamation was to be imprisoned for ten days and fined £5, every
receiver to be imprisoned twenty-one days. The importance still
attached to the harvest season is shown by the section that all
artificers and others were compellable to work in harvest or be put in
the stocks two days and a night. For the better advancement of
husbandry and tillage every householder farming 60 acres of tillage or
more might receive an apprentice in husbandry, but no tradesman or
merchant might take an apprentice save his own son, unless his parents
had freehold of the annual value of 40s.; and no person was to use
'any art mistery or manual occupation now in use' unless he had served
seven years' apprenticeship to it. There can be no doubt that the
clauses last quoted confined a large portion of the population to
agricultural work, but as we know that the people were deserting the
country and flocking to the towns, this must have seemed to the
framers of the law very desirable.
This method of fixing wages was in force until 1814, and its repeal
then was entirely contrary to the opinion of the artizan class; but it
may be doubted if the magistrates extensively used the powers given
them by the Act, and wages seem to have been settled generally by
competition. Several instances remain, however, of wages drawn up
under this Act. Almost immediately after it was passed, in June 1564,
the Rutland magistrates met under the Act, and stated that the prices
of linen, woollen, leather, corn, and other victuals were great, so
they drew up the following list of wages[246]:--
A bailiff in husbandry, having charge of two plough lands,
at least should have by the year 40s., and 8s.
for his livery.
A chief servant in husbandry, which can eire (plough), sow,
mow, thresh, make a rick, thatch and hedge, and can kill
and dress a hog, sheep, and calf, by the year 40s., and 6s.
for his livery.
A common servant in husbandry, which can mow, sow, thresh,
and load a cart, and cannot expertly make a rick, hedge, and
thatch, and cannot kill and dress a hog, sheep, or calf, by
the year 33s. 4d., and 5s. for his livery.
A mean servant in husbandry, which can drive the plough, pitch
The cart, and thresh, and cannot expertly sow, mow, thresh,
and load a cart, nor make a rick, nor thatch, by the year 24s.,
and 5s. for his livery.
The chief shepherd is only to receive 20s. and 5s. for his livery; but
this must be an error, as in the statutes 6 Hen. VIII, c. 3, and 23
Hen. VI, c. 12, he was placed next the bailiff as we should expect.
These wages were evidently 'with diet', and show a considerable
advance on those fixed by 6 Hen. VIII, c. 3.[247] By the day the
ordinary labourer was to have 6d. in winter, 7d. in summer, and 8d. to
10d. in harvest time, 'finding himself.' A mower with meat earned 5d.,
without meat 10d. a day; a man reaper with meat 4d., without 8d.; a
woman reaper 3d., and 6d.
As the price of corn and meat was three times what it had been in the
fifteenth century, and the labourers' wages, taking into consideration
his harvest pay, not quite double, the Rutland magistrates hardly
observed the spirit of the Act. Rutland, moreover, judging by the
assessments of the time, was a county where agriculture was very
flourishing; and thirty years after we find in Yorkshire that the
winter wages of the labourer were 4d. and the summer 5d. a day: that
is, he had little more wages than in the fifteenth century, with
provisions risen threefold. At Chester at the same date his day's
wages were to be 4d. all the year round.[248] In 1610 the Rutland
magistrates at Oakham[249] decreed that an ordinary labourer was to
have 6d. a day in winter and 7d. in summer, the same wages as in 1564,
yet wheat in that year averaged 32s. 7d. a quarter. A bailiff by the
year was now advanced to 52s., a manservant of the best sort, equal no
doubt to the chief servant in husbandry, to 50s., a 'common servant'
to 40s., and a 'mean servant' to 29s., but all without livery. At
Chelmsford, in 1651, there was a very different rate fixed, the
ordinary labourer getting from 1s. to 1s. 2d. a day; but this seems to
have been exceptional, as at Warwick in 1684 he was only to have 8d.,
and as late as 1725 in Lancashire 9d. to 10d. a day.[250] In 1682, by
the Bury St. Edmunds assessment, a common labourer got 10d. a day in
winter and 1s. in summer, and a reaper in harvest 1s. 8d. By the year
a bailiff was paid £6, a carter £5, and a common servant £3 10s., of
course with food.[251] These figures clearly prove that the wages
fixed by the magistrates were often terribly inadequate, though it
must be said in their defence that the great rise in prices probably
struck them as abnormal and not likely to last. It should be
remembered, too, that besides his wages the labourer and his family
had often bye industries such as weaving to fall back upon, and in
most parts of England still a piece of common land to help him.
FOOTNOTES:
[238] _Description of Britain_, iii. 2.
[239] _Transactions of the Royal Historical Society_ (New Series),
xvii. 235.
[240] Moryson, _Itinerary_ (ed. 1617), iii. 179.
[241] _Archaeologia_ xiii. 371.
[242] In 1650 it was much cultivated about London.
[243] _Collections on Husbandry and Trade_, ii. 468.
[244] _Six Centuries of Work and Wages_, p. 398.
[245] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, ii. 38. The Statute of
Labourers of 1351 made the same effort, see p. 43.
[246] Thorold Rogers, _History of Agriculture and Prices_, iv. 120;
and _Work and Wages_, p. 389.
[247] See above.
[248] Thorold Rogers, _Work and Wages_, pp. 390-1.
[249] _Archaeologia_, xi. 200.
[250] Thorold Rogers, _Six Centuries of Work and Wages_, p. 396.
[251] Cullum, _Hawsted_, p. 215. It is strange to find food reckoned
so highly; if the common labourer at Hawsted received his food, he was
only paid 5d. a day in winter, and 6d. in summer; if one man's food
was reckoned at half his wages, how far did the other half go in
feeding and clothing his family?
CHAPTER XI
1600-1700
CLOVER AND TURNIPS.--GREAT RISE IN PRICES. MORE ENCLOSURE.--A FARMING
CALENDAR
The seventeenth century was one of considerable progress in English
agriculture. The decay of common-field farming was enabling individual
enterprise to have its way. The population was rapidly growing; by
1688 the returns of the hearth tax prove that the northern counties
were nearly as thickly populated as the southern, and prices during
the first half were continually rising, though after that they
remained almost stationary, since the effect of the influx of precious
metals from the New World was exhausted. In the first half of the
century John Smyth ascribes the advance of rents to the Castilian
voyages opening the New World, whereby such floods of treasure have
flowed into Europe that the rates of Christendom are raised near
twentyfold'.
But the greatest agricultural event of the century was the
introduction of clover and the encouragement of turnips as grown in
Holland, by Sir Richard Weston, about 1645. No doubt the turnip was
already well known in England. Tusser and Fitzherbert both mention it,
apparently as a garden root only; but Gerard in his _Herbal_, 1597,
says it grew in fields 'and divers vineyards or hoppe gardens in most
places of England', which certainly points to an effort having been
made generally to use it as a field crop whenever an enclosed space
gave it some protection from the depredations of the common herds.
However, its cultivation must have declined, as long after this it was
regarded as a novelty as a field crop in most parts of England.[252]
In Holland it had been used in the field universally, and this use
with that of 'great', as it was called, or broad clover, Weston
pressed on the English farmer. But their progress was wofully slow. At
Hawsted in Suffolk clover and turnips were first sown about 1700, and
the eastern portion of England was far ahead of the north and west; as
late as 1772 Arthur Young wrote that 'sainfoin, cabbages, potatoes,
and carrots are not common crops in England; I do not imagine above
half or at most two-thirds of the nation cultivate clover.'[253] Yet
their introduction must have been of the greatest benefit to the
farmer and the public; his stock of hay was increased, he could
utilize his fallows, and keep a much larger head of stock through the
winter, who would give him a greater quantity of manure. Every one
where turnips were grown could now have fresh meat during the winter.
The slow progress of these great blessings is perhaps the strongest
testimony in our history of the innate conservatism of the farmer. The
green crop was for long considered to be suited only to the garden,
and as our forefathers were prejudiced against the spade it was
difficult to get such crops cultivated even there; but it should also
be remembered that no crop was possible in the common fields which did
not come to maturity before Lammas, unless some special agreement was
made as to it.[254] Clover, Sir Richard Weston said, thrives best when
sown on the worst and barrenest ground, which was to be pared and
burnt, and unslaked lime added to the ashes. Then it was to be well
ploughed and harrowed, and about 10 lb. of seed sown per acre in the
end of March or in April. 'It will stand five years, and then when
ploughed up will yield three or four years running rich crops of
wheat, and then a crop of oats, after which you may sow clover again.'
In the seventeenth century the practice of liming and marling, which
had been largely discontinued since the fourteenth century, was
revived (Westcote, in his _View of Devon_ in 1630, calls liming, &c.,
a new invention), and there was also a great improvement in
implements. Patents were taken out for draining machines in 1628, for
new manures in 1633-6, ploughs 1623-7 and 1634, mechanical sowing
1634-9. Only six were taken out, however, between 1640 and 1760 that
concerned agriculture.[255] The Civil War checked the improvement, for
though the great mass of the people had nothing to do with either
party, the country was of necessity in a very unsettled state, and
both sides plundered indiscriminately. Yet in some parts, as in
Devonshire, so many of the able men served in the two armies, that few
but old men, women, and children were left to manage the farms, and
even they were afraid to grow more than enough to supply themselves
since both armies seized the crops.[256] These bad effects lasted for
some time afterwards; Chapple, a Devonshire land agent of the
eighteenth century, says he had talked with people who remembered the
state of husbandry in the last ten or twelve years of the reign of
Charles II, when in many parts of Devonshire an acre or two of wheat
was esteemed a rarity.
That the rate of progress in the century was not more rapid is
attributed by Blyth to several causes[257]:--
1. Want of leases, by which tenants were deprived of security.
2. Discouragement to flood (irrigate) land, from the risk of
law suits with neighbours.
3. Intermixture of different properties in common fields.
4. Unlimited pasturage on commons, by which they were overstocked.
5. The want of a law compelling all men to kill moles.
6. The excessive number of water-mills, to the great destruction
of much gallant land.
The average price of wheat during the seventeenth century was 41s. a
quarter, of barley 22s., and oats 14s. 8-1/2d. Oxen averaged about £5
apiece, cows much less, about £3, and there was not much change in
their value during the century. Sheep were about 10s. 6d., and a
cart-horse in the first half of the century from £5 to £10, in the
second half from £8 to £15. Beef rose from 2d. a lb. in the early part
of the century to 3d. at the close of it. Wool remained stationary at
from 9d. to 1s. per lb.
[258]A proclamation of 1633 fixed the
following prices for London poulterers and victuallers:--
s. d.
Best turkey-cock 4 4
Duck 8
Best hen 1 0
3 eggs 1
1 lb. best fresh butter in winter 6
1 lb. best fresh butter in summer 5
1 lb. best salt butter 4-1/2
Best fat goose 2 0
" crammed capon 2 6
" pullet 1 6
" chicken 6
According to the _Manydown Manor Rolls_ the Wootton churchwardens in
1600 paid from 8s. to 11s. for calves, 4s. 4d. for a fat lamb, 8s. for
a sheep, 6s. 8d. for a barren ewe, 6d. for a couple of chickens, 1s.
6d. for 500 faggots.[259]
After the restoration in 1660 another period of prosperity set
in,[260] and altogether the century was a prosperous one for farmers
and manufacturers. The newly established Royal Society materially
helped agriculture. 'Since his majesty's most happy restoration the
whole land hath been fermented and stirred up by the profitable hints
it hath received from the Royal Society, by which means parks have
been disparked, commons enclosed, woods turned into arable, and
pasture lands improved by clover, St. foine, turnips, cole-seed, and
many other good husbandries, so that the food of cattle is increased
as fast, if not faster, than the consumption, and by these means the
rent of the kingdom is far greater than ever it was.'[261] The century
was distinguished also for the curious number of cycles of good and
bad seasons; 1646-50 were years of prolonged dearth, wheat reaching an
enormous price, and 1661-2, were famine years, while the end of the
century was long famous for its barren years.
With the prices of produce rents rose enormously. Very early in the
century[262] rents of arable land had increased ninefold, since the
fifteenth century, and by 1688 Davenant and King estimated the average
rent of arable land in England at 5s. 6d. per acre and of permanent
grass at 8s. 8d. Perhaps this is too high an estimate, as on the
Belvoir estate of 17,837 acres in 1692 the rental all round was 3s.
9-1/4d. an acre for land above the average in quality, though it must
be remembered that the Earls and Dukes of Rutland were indulgent
landlords.
The _History of Hawsted_ affords a valuable index of the increase of
rents at this period.[263] In 1500 the average rent was 1s. 4d. an
acre; in 1572, 39 acres of arable, meadow, and pasture were let for
2s. 3d. an acre, the landlord, it is interesting to notice, reserving
the right of hawking, netting rabbits, hunting, and fowling; and about
the same date other lands on the estate were let at 1s. 3d. and 1s.
6d. an acre, so that there had not generally been much advance since
1500, which is what we should expect, as the great rise took place at
the end of the sixteenth and the beginning of the seventeenth
centuries. In 1589, therefore, it is not surprising to find that 40
acres of meadow and pasture let at 5s. an acre, and in 1611 some
buildings and 155 acres of park at 11s. an acre. In 1616, 366 acres of
arable and pasture and 39 acres of meadow were valued at 12s. an acre
for letting, and the Hall Farm of 175 acres (8-1/2 acres meadow) at
10s.; and Great Pipers Farm of 138 acres (8 meadow) at 7s., while
meadow and pasture near the mansion was valued at 21s. an acre.
In 1658 the rent of the Hall Farm had advanced from 10s. an acre to
about 13s., though in 1682 it went down to 11s. 6d.[264] According to
the survey of the Manor of Manydown in Hampshire in 1650, meadow land
was worth 20s. an acre, pasture 8s. to 10s., arable from 2s. to 10s.,
the latter showing a great variation in quality.[265] In 1723 Bryers
Wood Farm at Hawsted, which had been let in 1620 for £15, was let at
£29 5s. These rents are considerably higher than the estimate of
Davenant and King; but it must be remembered that they were for land
in the parts of England, where farming was at its best, and they, in
accounting for the whole country, had to take into consideration a
vast amount of land in the north and west which was worth very little.
In the Rawlinson Collection[266] in the Bodleian Library is a rental
of Lord Kingston's estate in north Nottinghamshire in 1689, the rents
averaging 10s. an acre; but this was an exceptionally good estate,
much of the property being meadow and pasture. The farmhouses also
were above the average, while in two of the parishes the tenants had
rights of common, and in two others the tenancies were tithe free.
There was very little arable land on the estate, three small holdings
letting for 6s. 8d. an acre; and some of the pasture land was let at
14s., 15s. 6d., and even 18s. an acre. The largest farm, Saundby Hall,
of 607 acres, nearly all meadow and pasture, was 9s. 10d. an acre. The
cottages were fortunate in having pieces of land attached to them. In
Saundby, Richard Ffydall rented a cottage and 2 acres of arable land
for £1 13s. 4d.; Widow Johnson a cottage and yard for 13s. 4d.;
William Daubney a cottage with 6-1/2 acres of arable and 5-1/2 acres
of pasture for £7 18s. 6d. A farm in Scrooby, consisting of a
messuage, cottage, and 113 acres of arable, meadow, and pasture, only
let at £23.
As to the freehold value of land, in 1621, according to D'Ewes, it was
worth from sixteen to twenty years' purchase; yet, in 1688, Sir Josiah
Child said that lands now sell at twenty years' purchase, which fifty
or sixty years before sold at eight or ten; and he also states, 'the
same farms or lands to be now sold would yield treble and in some
cases six times the money they were sold for fifty years ago'.[267]
Davenant puts land at twelve years' purchase in 1600, at eighteen
years in 1688.[268] In 1729 the price of land was said to be
twenty-seven years' purchased.[269]
The legislation against laying down tillage to grass was continued
until the end of the sixteenth century. The statute 39 Eliz., c. 1,
repealed 4 Hen. VII, c. 19, and all other Acts against pulling down
houses, and provided that a house of husbandry should be a house that
hath or hath had 20 acres of arable land. All such houses which had
been destroyed during the last seven years were to be rebuilt, and if
destroyed more than seven years only one-half was to be rebuilt; but
to each of them at least 40 acres of land were to be attached.
The next statute, 39 Eliz., c. 2, sets forth once more the advantages
of tillage, viz. the increase and multiplying of people for service in
the wars, and in time of peace the employment of a greater number of
people, the keeping of people from poverty, the dispersal of the
wealth of the kingdom in many hands, and 'the standing of this realm
upon itself without depending upon foreign countries'[270]; and
therefore enacts that lands converted from tillage to pasture shall be
restored to tillage within three years, and lands then in tillage
should be so continued; but this was only to extend to twenty-three
counties, and omitted most of those in the south-west. At the
beginning of the seventeenth century a reaction set in; the price of
corn had risen immensely and continued to do so, the price of wool
remained stationary, and tillage was as profitable as grass. In 1620
Coke speaks of the man who only kept a shepherd and a dog as one who
never prospered. In 1624 several of the tillage laws were
repealed.[271]
As an example of the unenclosed fields, at the end of the sixteenth
century, we may take the common fields at Daventry, which were three
in number, containing respectively 368, 383, and 524 acres, divided
into furlongs, a term which had now a very wide signification, each of
which was subdivided into lands nearly always half an acre in extent,
several of these lands when adjoining being often held now by the same
owner. One furlong may be taken as an example. It was 37 acres 1 rood
in extent, and contained ninety-six lands, owned by seventeen people.
The meadows were divided still more minutely, some of the smaller
portions being only a quarter of an acre each. The largest meadow
contained 50 acres, divided among fifty-three people. In the manor,
besides the arable and meadow, there were 300 acres of common
pasture, a park, and a small wood. There were forty-one freeholders
and many leasehold tenants, the average freehold being 34 acres, the
average leasehold only half an acre, small holdings being the usual
feature of the unenclosed township.
In the seventeenth century the price of wool ceased to operate as a
cause of enclosure, but in many parts the change to pasture continued,
owing to the rise in price of cattle and of wages. The same reason,
too, for laying down land to grass that had been so powerful in the
preceding centuries still existed, the common arable fields needed
rest from continual cropping and poor manuring, while good crops of
corn could be grown from the virgin soil of the newly enclosed waste.
The preamble of the Durham decrees clearly states this: 'the land is
wasted and worn with continual ploweing, and thereby made bare,
barren, and very unfruitful.'[272] We may, therefore, take Coke's
words as inapplicable to many districts. In the seventeenth century
there were several methods of enclosing. Sometimes the lord of the
manor enclosed and left the land of the tenants still in common; or a
tenant enclosed piece by piece; or enclosures were made by Act of
Parliament, the earliest of which for common fields was passed in the
time of James I, a method at this period very seldom used; or there
was an agreement between lord and tenants often authorized by the
Courts of Chancery or Exchequer.
Besides enclosure, another process was going on, the consolidation of
farms by the amalgamation of small holdings into larger ones.
Farmhouses, as we see them to-day, began to appear on the holdings
thus consolidated, instead of being grouped together in villages. A
writer in 1604 says, 'we may see many of their houses built alone like
raven's nests, no birds building neere them' so unwonted was the sight
of isolated dwellings in most places at the time.
However, in 1630 Charles I went back to the policy of his forefathers
and issued letters to certain of the Midland counties ordering all
enclosures of the last two years to be removed, and Commissions were
issued to inquire into the matter in 1632, 1635, and 1636,[273] the
chief evil feared from enclosures being depopulation, and enclosers
were prosecuted in the Court of Star Chamber.
The assertion that enclosures ceased during the seventeenth century
has been proved inaccurate by modern research, and there is no doubt
that they went on continuously. In 1607, in the Midlands, the
enclosing of land produced serious armed resistance, probably because
the Midland counties were then the great corn-growing district of
England, and the change to pasture and the consolidation of farms
displaced a larger population there than elsewhere. Between 1628 and
1630 enclosures in Leicestershire, for instance, were very numerous,
no less than 10,000 acres being enclosed in that time, most of which
was converted to pasture. The attempt of the Government to check the
movement, initiated by Charles I, seems to have had considerable
effect, but died away with the Civil War, and though other attempts
were made under the Commonwealth they came to nothing, and from this
time enclosures went on unchecked by the Government,[274] and were
soon to have its active support. Yet there was a vast amount still in
common field: the whole of the cultivated land of England in 1685 was
stated by King and Davenant to amount to not much more than half the
total area, and of this cultivated portion three-fifths was still
farmed on the old common-field system. Northamptonshire,
Leicestershire, Rutland, Huntingdonshire, and Bedfordshire were
comparatively unenclosed.[275] From the books and maps of the day 'it
is clear that many routes which now pass through an endless succession
of orchards, corn-fields, hay-fields, and bean-fields then ran through
nothing but heath, swamp, and warren. In the drawings of an English
landscape made in that age for the Grand Duke Cosmo scarce a hedgerow
is to be seen.... At Enfield, hardly out of sight of the smoke of the
capital, was a region of five-and-twenty miles in circumference which
contained only three houses and scarcely any enclosed fields.'[276]
The enclosure of these areas was to be mainly the work of the latter
half of the eighteenth and the first quarter of the nineteenth
centuries.
The amount of enclosure in the fifteenth, sixteenth, and the first
half of the seventeenth centuries was, according to the latest
research, much, and perhaps very naturally, exaggerated by
contemporaries. Between 1455-1607 the enclosures in twenty-four
counties are said to have amounted to some 500,000 acres, or 2.76 of
their total area,[277] but the evidence for this is by no means
conclusive. However, there seems no reason to doubt that the enclosure
of this period was but a faint beginning of that great outburst of it
that marked the agrarian revolution of the middle of the eighteenth
century, and that it was mainly confined to the Midland counties, Mr.
Johnson, in his recent Ford Lectures, has stated that the enclosure of
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries was not accompanied by very
much direct eviction of freeholders or bona fide copyholders of
inheritance; yet the small holder suffered in many ways, e.g. by the
lord disproving the hereditary character of the copyhold, or by
changing copyholds of inheritance into copyholds for lives or leases
for lives or years. He and his successors could then refuse to renew
at the termination of lives or years except on payment of a
practically prohibitory fine. In short, though there was not much
violation of legal right there was much injustice, and enclosure,
though its effects were exaggerated at this period, certainly tended
to displace the small landholder. It does not appear, however, that
the moderate-sized proprietors were seriously affected. Many of the
larger freeholders and copyholders on manors enclosed on their own
account, and perhaps increased at the expense of the very large and
the very small. Indeed, the decrease of small landowners was chiefly
due to political and social causes. The old self-sufficing,
agricultural economy of England, which we have seen beginning to break
up in the fourteenth century, was becoming thoroughly disintegrated.
The capitalist class was increasing; the successful merchant and
lawyer were acquiring land and becoming squires; there was an intense
land hunger. Simon Degge, wilting of Staffordshire in 1669, says that
in the previous sixty years half the lands had changed owners, not so
much as of old they were wont to do, by marriage, but by purchase; and
he notices how many lawyers and tradesmen have supplanted the
gentry.[278]
In fact, there was a much freer disposal of lands from the end of the
fifteenth century, when the famous Taltarum's case enabled entailed
estates to be barred, until the Restoration, than there has been
before or since. For these two hundred years the courts of law and
parliament resisted every effort to re-establish the system of
entails; the owners of land constantly multiplied, and this tendency
must have counteracted the displacement of the small holder by
enclosure. Sir Thomas Smith, writing towards the end of the sixteenth
century, says that it was the yeomen who bought the lands of
'unthrifty gentlemen;' and Moryson tells us that 'the buyers
(excepting lawyers) are for the most part citizens and vulgar
men'.[279] It became one of the boasts of England that she had a large
number of yeomen farming their own land. During the Civil War,
however, it became important to landowners to protect their properties
in the interest of children and descendants from forfeiture for
treason. The judges lent their aid, and the system of strict family
settlements was devised, under which the great bulk of the estates in
England are now held. This system favoured the accumulation of lands
in a few hands and the aggregation of great estates, and was largely
responsible for the disappearance of the small freeholder.
In reviewing the progress of agriculture in the seventeenth century,
the drainage of the fen country of Lincolnshire and the adjoining
counties must not be forgotten. It had been for centuries the scene of
drainage operations on a more or less extended scale, few of which,
however, met with success; but in the seventeenth century the growing
value of land caused a serious revival of these efforts. Attempts made
under Elizabeth and James I had only succeeded in rescuing a certain
amount of land for pasture,[280] but in the reign of Charles I the
scheme of Cornelius Vermuyden was more successful. His system,
however, was defective, and in the reign of Charles II the Bedford
Level was in a lamentable state and in danger of reverting to its
primitive condition. Many of the works too were destroyed by the
'stiltwalkers', and in 1793 Maxwell states that out of 44,000 acres of
fen land in Huntingdonshire only 8,000 or 10,000 were productive[281];
and in 1794 Stone tells us that the commons round the Isle of
Axholme were chiefly covered with water.[282] Still to Vermuyden and
his contemporaries must be assigned the credit of the first
comprehensive scheme for rescuing these fertile lands from the waters
that covered them.
At the commencement of this important century an old calendar of
1606[283] clearly sets forth the farming work of the year:--
January and February are the best months for ploughing for peas,
beans, and oats, and to have peas soon in the year following sow them
in the wane of the moon at S. Andrewstide before Christmas; which may
be compared to Tusser's advice for February,
'Go plow in the stubble, for now is the season
For sowing of fitches of beans and of peason.'
'Clean grounds of all such rubbish as briars, brambles, blackthorns,
and shrubbs' (then more often choking the ground than now), which are
to be fagoted as good fuel for baking and brewing.
'Do not plough in rainy weather, for it impoverisheth the earth.'
March and April. Take up colts from grass to be broken. Sow beans,
peas, and oats. In these months are all grounds where cattle went in
the last winter to be furthed (apparently managed) and cleared and the
mole-hills scattered, that the fresh spring of grass may grow better.
All hedges and ditches to be made betwixt 'severals', evidently
enclosures as distinguished from common fields. From March 25 to May 1
summer pastures are to be spared, that they may have time to get head
before summer cattle be put in. In the meantime such cattle are to be
bestowed in meadows till May Day, and after that date such meadows are
to be cleansed and spared until the crops of hay be taken off. From
now till midsummer sell fat cattle and sheep, and with the money buy
lean cattle and sheep. Sow barley.
May and June. Sort all cattle for their summer pasture on May Day,
viz. draught oxen by themselves, milch cows by themselves, weaning
calves, yearlings, two-year-olds, three- and four-year-olds, every
sort by themselves, which being divided in pasture fitting for them
will make larger and fairer cattle. Separate the horses in the same
way. Wash sheep and shear four or five days after, which done the wool
is to be well wound and weighed, and safely laid up in some place
where there is not too much air or it will lose weight, nor where it
is damp or it will increase too much in weight. Cleanse winter corn
from thistles and weeds.
July and August. First of all comes hay-making. In August wean lambs,
and put them in good pasture, and in winter put them in fresh pasture
until spring, and then put them with the 'holding' sheep.
In these months is corn to be 'shornne or mowen downe' (the writer, it
is to be noticed, has no preference for either method); and after the
corn is carried put draught horses and oxen into the averish (corn
stubble), to ease other pastures; and after them put hogs in. Gather
crabs in woods and hedgerows for making verjuice.
September and October. Have all plows and harrows neat and fit for
sowing of wheat, rye, mesling (wheat and rye mixed), and vetches.[284]
Pick hops. Buy store cattle, both steers and heifers, of three or four
years old, which being well wintered at grass, or on straw at the barn
doors, will be the sooner fed the summer following, and they will
sooner feed after straw than grass.
From October to May are calves to be reared, because then they be more
hardly bred and become the stronger cattle. Feed brawns, bacons,
lards, and porkets on mast if there is any, if not on corn. 'In these
months cleanse poundes or pools, this season being the driest;' an
extraordinary assertion, unless the climate has changed, seeing that
according to the monthly averages from 1841-1906, taken at the Royal
Observatory, Greenwich, October is the wettest month in the year.[285]
November and December. Sort all kinds of sheep until Lady Day, viz.
wethers by themselves, and weaning lambs by themselves; and do not put
rams to the ewes before S. Lukestide, October 18, for those lambs fall
about March 25, and if they fall before then the scarcity of grass and
the cold will so nip and chill them that they will die or be
weaklings. It is good at this time to take draught cattle and horses
from grass into the house before any great storms begin. Thrash corn
now after it hath had a good sweat in the mow, and so dried again, and
give the straw to the draught oxen and cattle at the standaxe or at
the barn doors for sparing of hay, advice which Tusser also gives:
'Serve rie straw out first, then wheat straw and peas,
Then ote straw and barley, then hay if ye please.'
FOOTNOTES:
[252] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1896, pp. 77 sq., and Gerard, _Herbal_ (ed.
1633), p. 232.
[253] About 1684, John Worlidge wrote to Houghton that sheep fatted on
clover were not such delicate meat as the heath croppers, and that
sheep fatten very well on turnips. Houghton, _Collection for
Improvement of Husbandry_, iv. 142. This is said to be the first
notice of turnips being given to sheep.
[254] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1896, p. 77. One of the proofs of the rarity
of vegetables among the poorer classes of England, especially in the
Middle Ages, is the fact that rents paid in kind never included them.
[255] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1892, p. 19.
[256] Chapple, _Review of Risdon's Survey of Devon_ (1785), p. 17 n.
_Victoria County History: Devonshire, Agriculture_.
[257] Blyth was a great advocate of enclosure. 'Live the commoners do
indeed', he says, 'very many in a mean, low condition, with hunger and
ease. Better do these in Bridewell. What they get they spend. And can
they make even at the year's rent?'
[258] Rymer, _Foedera_ (Orig. ed.), xix. 512.
[259] _Manydown Manor Rolls_, Hampshire Record Society, p. 172.
[260] Thorold Rogers, _Work and Wages_, p. 459.
[261] Houghton, _Collections, &c._, ii. 448.
[262] Thorold Rogers, _History of Agriculture and Prices_, v. p. vii.
Cf. p. 139 infra.
[263] Cullum, _Hawsted_, pp. 196 et seq. In the Hawsted leases, at the
end of the sixteenth and beginning of the seventeenth centuries, it is
noteworthy that there were, at a time of repeated complaints against
laying down land to pasture, clauses against breaking up pasture land.
[264] In 1677 there were complaints of a fall in rents.
[265] _Manydown Manor Rolls_, Hampshire Record Society, pp. 178 et
seq.
[266] Rawl. A. 170, No. 101.
[267] McPherson, _Annals of Commerce_, ii. 483.
[268] Ibid. ii. 630.
[269] Ibid. iii. 147. The rental of the lands in England in 1600 was
estimated by Davenant at £6,000,000, in 1688 at £14,000,000; and in
1726 by Phillips at £20,000,000. Ibid. iii. 133. In 1850, Caird
estimated it at £37,412,000.
[270] With what horror would those legislators have contemplated
England's position to-day, when a temporary loss of the command of the
sea would probably ruin the country.
[271] 21 Jac. 1, c. 28.
[272] _Transactions of the Royal Historical Society_ (New Series),
xix. 116.
[273] _Transactions of the Royal Historical Society_ (New Series),
xix. 127.
[274] Ibid. 130.
[275] See article in _Transactions of the Royal Historical Society_
(New Series), xix.
[276] Macaulay, _History of England_, ch. iii.
[277] _Quarterly Journal of Economics_, xvii. 587. Considering that
the legislature of the sixteenth century was against enclosure and
depopulation, it is hard to understand 31 Eliz., c. 7, which forbade
cottages to be erected unless 4 acres of land were attached thereto,
in order to avoid the great inconvenience caused by the 'buyldinge of
great nombers and multitude of cottages, which are daylie more and
more increased in many partes of this realme'. How was it that
cottages had increased so much in rural districts, which are of course
alluded to, in spite of enclosure?
[278] Harwood, _Erdeswick_.
[279] Hasbach, _op. cit._ p. 44.
[280] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 187.
[281] _General View of Hunts._, p. 8.
[282] _General View of Lincoln_, p. 29.
[283] _Farming Calendar_, from an original MS., printed in
_Archaeologia_, xiii. 373 et seq.
[284] Cf. Tusser:
'October for wheat-sowing calleth as fast';
and
'When wheat upon eddish (stubble), ye mind to bestowe Let that be the
first of the wheat ye do sowe';
and
'Who soweth in raine, he shall reap it with tears'.
[285] The writer of the diary probably meant this work should be done
in September.
CHAPTER XII
THE GREAT AGRICULTURAL WRITERS OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.--FRUIT
GROWING. A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY ORCHARD
The seventeenth century is distinguished by a number of agricultural
writers whose works, as they afford the best account of the farming of
the time, we may be pardoned for freely quoting. The best known of
them were, Sir John Norden, Gervase Markham, Sir Richard Weston,
Blythe, Hartlib, Sir Hugh Plat, John Evelyn, John Worlidge, and
Houghton.
Sir John Norden printed his _Surveyor's Dialogue_ in 1608, which is in
the form of a conversation between a farmer and a surveyor, the former
at the outset telling the latter that men of his profession were then
very unpopular because 'you pry into men's titles and estates, and
oftentimes you are the cause that men lose their land, and customs are
altered, broken, and sometimes perverted by your means. And above all,
you look into the values of men's lands, wherefore the lords of manors
do reckon their tenants to a higher rent, and therefore not only I but
many poore tenants have good cause to speak against the
profession'.[286]
The surveyor attributes the increase in prices to farmers outbidding
one another for farms, for the rents of farms and prices grow
together; a statement which seems to have been quite true and disposes
of the assertion that the landlords raised the rents unfairly, for
they were quite entitled to what rent they could get in the open
market, the farmers being presumably wise enough not to offer rents
which would preclude a profit. He further blames the farmer of his day
for being discontented with his lot: in former times 'farmers and
their wives were content with mean dyet and base attire and held their
children to some austere government, without haunting alehouses,
taverns, dice, and cards; now the husbandman will be equal to the
yeoman, the yeoman to the gentleman, the gentleman to the squire, and
there is at this day thirty times as much vainely spent in a family of
like multitude and quality as was in former ages'; a complaint that
has been common in all ages. Contrary to what is the practice to-day,
and apparently to common sense, the surveyor recommends that open
drains be made as narrow above as at the bottom, at the most not more
than a foot and a half broad.[287] Hops, he says, were then grown in
Suffolk, Essex, and Surrey, 'in your loose and spongie grounds,
trenched.' 'Carret' roots were raised in Suffolk and Essex, and
beginning to increase in all parts of the realm[288]; but if he
alludes to their cultivation in the open field the statement must be
taken with considerable qualification, as they were not so grown
generally until the end of the eighteenth century or the beginning of
the next.
Kent was then, as now, the great fruit county of England; 'above all
others I think the Kentishmen be most apt and industrious in planting
orchards with pippins and cherries, especially near the Thames about
Feversham and Sittingbourne.' But Devon and Hereford were also famous;
Westcote about 1630 says the Devonshire men had of late much enlarged
their orchards, and 'are very curious in planting and grafting all
kinds of fruit'[289]; and John Beale in 1656 tells us Hereford 'is
reputed the orchard of England'[290]; while Hartlib says there were
many orchards in Worcestershire and Gloucestershire.[291] He calls
'Tandeane' near Taunton the Paradise of England, where the husbandry
was excellent, the land fruitful by nature and improved by the art and
industry of the farmers; 'they take extraordinary pains in soyling,
ploughing, and dressing their lands, and after the plow there goeth
some three or four with mattocks to break the clods and to draw up the
earth out of the furrows that the lands may lye round, and that the
water annoy not the seed (the water evidently often lying long in the
furrows between the great high ridges), and to that end they most
carefully cut gutters and trenches in all places. And for the better
enriching of their ploughing lands they cut up, cast, and carry in the
unplowed headlands and places of no use. Their hearts, hands, eyes,
and all their powers concurre in one to force the earth to yield her
utmost fruit; and the crops of wheat that rewarded this industry were
sometimes 8 and 10 quarters to an acre.
A short pamphlet called the _Fruiterer's Secrets_, published in London
in 1604, imparts some interesting and curious information about fruit
growing.[292] There were then four sorts of cherries in England,
Flemish,[293] English, Gascoyne, and black, and the preserving of them
from birds, always a burden on the grower, the author says can be done
by a gun or a sling; the worst enemies being jays and bullfinches, who
ate stones and all. Stone fruit should be gathered in dry weather, and
after the dew is off, for if gathered wet it loses colour and becomes
mildewed. If nettles newly gathered are laid at the bottom of the
basket and on the top of the fruit, they will hasten the ripening of
fruit picked unripe, and make it keep its colour.
Those English farmers who still shake their apples from the trees to
fall and be bruised on the ground had better listen to the careful
directions for placing the ladder on the trees where it will do no
damage, as to the use of the gathering hook so that the branches can
be brought within easy reach of the picker on his ladder, the wearing
of a gathering apron, and the emptying of it gently into the baskets.
Green fern has the same effect on pears packed for carriage as nettles
on stone fruit; while apples should be packed in wheat, or better
still in rye straw. For long journeys the American system of packing
in barrels is anticipated, the apples being carefully put in by hand,
and the barrels lined at both ends with straw, but not at the sides to
avoid heating, while holes should be bored at either end to prevent
heat. Pippins, John Apples, Pearmains, and other 'keepers' need not be
turned until the week before Christmas, and again at the end of March,
when they must be turned oftener; but never touch fruit during a frost
or a thaw, or in rainy weather, or it will turn black.
Hartlib, a few years after, reckoned no less than 500 sorts of apples
in England, though doubtless many of these were identical, since the
same apple often has two or three names in one parish. The best for
the table were the Jennetings, Harvey Apple, Golden Pippin, Summer and
Winter Pearmains, John Apple, &c.; for cider the Red Streak (the great
favourite), Jennet Moyle, Eliot, Stocking Apple, &c. He was told that
in Herefordshire a tenant bought the farm he rented with the fruit
crop of one year; £10 to £15 having been given per acre for cherries
and more for apples and pears. Pears for the table were the Windsor,
'Burgamet,' 'Boon Christians'! Greenfield, and others; and for perry,
which John Beale, a well-known writer of the day considered 'a weak
drink, fit for our hindes and generally refused by our gentry as
breeding wind in the stomack', the Horse Pear, Bosbury, Choak,
&c.[294] There were many kinds of plums, among them the Mistle Plum,
Damazene, Violet, and Premorden.
Four kinds of grafting were practised: in the cleft, and in the bark,
the two most usual ways; shoulder or whip grafting, and grafting by
approach,[295] the last 'where the stock you intend to graft on and the
tree from which you take your graft stand so near together that they
may be joined, then take the sprig you intend to graft and pare away
about three inches in length of the rind and wood near unto the very
pith, and cut also the stock on which you intend to graft the same
after the same manner that they may evenly join each other, and so
bind them and cover them with clay or wax.' Inoculation was also
practised, 'when the sap is at the fullest in the summer, the buds you
intend to inoculate being not too young but sufficiently grown.' For
transplanting the middle of October is recommended, and the wise
advice added, 'plant not too deep,' and in clay plant as near the
surface as possible, for the roots will seek their way downward but
rarely upward; and in transplanting 'you may prune the branches as
well as the roots of apples and pears, but not of plums.' The best
distance apart in an orchard for apples and pears was considered to be
from 20 to 30 feet, the further apart the more they benefit from the
sun and air, a piece of advice which many a subsequent planter has
neglected. For cherries and plums 15 to 20 feet was thought right.
Worlidge's directions for pruning are minute and careful, and should
be well hammered into many slovenly farmers to-day.
Cider-making was performed much as it is in old-fashioned farms
to-day, by mashing the apples in a trough by means of a millstone set
edgeways, and then pressing the juice out through hair mats, the
juice, says Hartlib, 'having been let stand a day or two and the black
scum that ariseth in that time taken off they tunne it, and in the
barrels it continueth to work some days longer, just as beer useth to
do.[296] Another method was to put the fruit in a clean vessel or
trough, and bruise or crush it with beetles, then put the crushed
fruit in a bag of hair-cloth and press it.[297] After the cider was in
the barrels there was placed in them a linen bag containing cloves,
mace, cinnamon, ginger, and lemon peel which was said to make the
cider taste as pleasantly as Rhenish wine.
Worlidge gives us what is perhaps the first mention of a poultry farm,
and strangely enough it seems to have paid. 'I have been credibly
informed that a good farm hath been wholly stocked with poultry,
spending the whole crop upon them and keeping severall to attend them,
and that it hath redounded to a very considerable improvement'.[298]
Incubators of a very rude sort were used, three or four dozen eggs
being placed in a 'lamp furnace made of a few boards', and hatched by
the heat of a lamp or candle.
It must strike the reader that the accusation levelled against the
English farmer, of having made little progress in his art from the
Middle Ages to the commencement of the reign of George III is hardly
warranted. Their knowledge and skill in their business were evidently
such as to make considerable progress inevitable, and then as now they
were in some cases assisted by their landlords, as in Herefordshire,
where Lord Scudamore, after the assassination of his friend the Duke
of Buckingham, devoted his energies to the culture of fruit, and with
other public-spirited gentlemen turned that county into 'one entire
orchard', besides improving the pastures and woods[299]; though
Hartlib laments that gentlemen try so few experiments for the
advancement of agriculture, and that both landowners and farmers
instead of communicating their knowledge to each other kept it
jealously to themselves.[300] The chief hindrance to landlord and
tenant was that the heavy hand of ancient custom lay upon them, with
its antiquated communistic system of farming, which still in the
greater part of the land of England utterly prevented good husbandry
and stifled individual effort. It was one of these Herefordshire
gentlemen. Rowland Vaughan, who in 1610 wrote what is probably the
first account of irrigation in England, though the art was mentioned
by Fitzherbert and must have been known in Devon and Hampshire long
before his time; indeed, it is another instance of the then isolation
of country districts that he speaks as if he had made a new discovery.
He tells us that 'having sojourned two years in his father's house,
wearied in doing nothing and fearing his fortunes had been overthrown,
he cast about what was best to be done to retrieve his reputation'.
And one day he saw from a mole-hill on the side of a brook on his
property a little stream of water issuing down the working of the
mole, which made the ground 'pleasing green', and from this he was led
on to what he calls 'the drowning of his lands'. This was so
successful that he improved the value of his estate from £40 to £300 a
year, and his neighbours, who of course had first scoffed at him, came
to learn from him. Not many years after 'drowning' was said to have
become one of the most universal and advantageous improvements in
England.[301] Vaughan says that he had counted as many as 300 persons
gleaning in one field after harvest, and that in the mountains near
eggs were 20 a penny, and a good bullock 26s. 3d., but this was a
backward region.[302]
Between 1617 and 1621 the price of wheat fell from 43s. 3d. to 21s. a
quarter, and immediately affected the payment of rent.[303] Mr. John
Chamberlain, in February, 1620, wrote to Sir Dudley Carleton, 'We are
here in a strange state to complain of plenty, but so it is that corn
beareth so low a price that farmers are very backward to pay their
rents and in many places plead disability: for remedy whereof the
Council have written letters into every shire to provide a granary
with a stock to buy corn and keep it for a dear year.' Sir Symonds
D'Ewes notes in his diary that 'at this time (1621) the rates of all
sorts of corn were so extremely low as it made the very prices of land
fall from twenty years' purchase to sixteen or seventeen. For the best
wheat was sold for 2s. 8d. and 2s. 6d. the bushel, the ordinary at 2s.
Barley and rye at 1s. 4d. and 1s. 3d. the bushel, and the worser of
those grains at a meaner rate, the poorer sort that would have been
glad but a few years before of coarse rye bread, did now usually
traverse the markets to find out the finer wheats as if nothing else
would please their palates'. Instead of being glad that they were for
once having a small share of the good things of this world, he
rejoices that their unthankfulness and daintiness was soon punished by
high prices and dearness of all sorts of grain.[304] The year 1630 was
the commencement of a series of dear seasons, when for nine
consecutive years the price of wheat did not fall below 40s. a quarter
and actually touched 86s. The restraints laid on corn-dealers had,
since the principles of commerce were being better understood, been
modified in 1624, but the high prices revived the old hatred against
them, and we find Sir John Wingfield writing from Rutland that he has
'taken order that ingrossers of corne shall be carefullie seen unto
and that there is no Badger (corn-dealer) licensed to carry corne out
of this countrye nor any starch made of any kind of graine'. He adds
that he had 'refrayned the maulsters from excessive making of mault,
and had suppressed 20 alehouses'.[305] However, the senseless policy
of preventing trade in corn received a severe blow from the statute 15
Car. II, c. 7, which enacted that when corn was under 48s. persons
were to be allowed to buy and store corn and sell the same again
without penalty, provided they did not sell it in the same market
within three months of buying it, a statute which Adam Smith said
contributed more to the progress of agriculture than any previous law
in the statute book.
Gervase Markham, who was born about 1568 and died in 1637, gives us a
description of the day's work of the English farmer. He is to rise at
four in the morning, feed his cattle and clean his stable. While they
are feeding he is to get his harness ready, which will take him two
hours. Then he is to have his breakfast, for which half an hour is
allowed. Getting the harness on his horses or cattle, he is to start
by seven to his work and keep at it till between two and three in the
afternoon. Then he shall bring his team home, clean them and give them
their food, dine himself, and at four go back to his cattle and give
them more fodder, and getting into his barn make ready their food for
next day, not forgetting to see them again before going to his own
supper at six. After supper he is to mend shoes by the fireside for
himself and his family, or beat and knock hemp and flax, or pitch and
stamp apples or crabs for cider or verjuice, or else grind malt, pick
candle-rushes, or 'do some husbandry office within doors till it
befall eight o'clock'. Then he shall take his lantern, visit his
cattle once more, and go with all his household to rest. The farm
roller of this time, according to Markham, was made of a round piece
of wood 30 inches in circumference, 6 feet long, having at each end a
strong pin of iron to which shafts were made fast.[306] He mentions
wooden and iron harrows, but this refers only to the tines, the wooden
ones being made of ash. From an illustration of a harrow which he
gives, it appears it was much like Fitzherbert's and many used to-day:
a wooden frame, with the teeth set perhaps more closely than ours; the
single harrow 4 feet square drawn by one horse, the double harrow 7
feet square by two oxen at least. Wheat he says, when the land is dug
15 inches deep, and the seed dibbled in, will produce twelve times as
much as when ploughed; but he admits the 'intricacy and trouble' of
this method.[307] As to the question of mowing or reaping corn, he is
of opinion that though 'it is a custom in many countries of this
kingdom not to sheare the wheat but to mow it, in my conceit it is not
so good, for it both maketh the wheate foule and full of weede'.
Barley, however, should be mown close to the ground, though many reap
it; oats too were to be mown. His directions for planting an
orchard[308] are interesting, both as showing the kinds of fruit then
grown, the number of different sorts planted together, and the growth
of the olive in England.[309] The orchard, he says, should be a
square, divided into four quarters by alleys, and in the first quarter
should be apples of all sorts, in the second pears and wardens of all
sorts, in the third quinces and chestnuts, in the fourth medlars and
services. A wall is the best fence, and on the north wall, 'against
which the sunne reflects, you shall plant the abricot, verdochio,
peache, and damaske plumbe; against the east side the white muskadine
grape, the pescod plumbe, and the Emperiale plumbe; against the west,
the grafted cherries and the olive tree; and against the south side
the almond and the figge tree.' As if this extraordinary mixture were
not enough, 'round about the skirts of the alleys' were to be planted
plums, damsons, cherries, filberts and nuts of all sorts, and the
'horse clog' and 'bulleye', the two latter being inferior wild plums.
Plums were to be 5 feet apart, apples and other large fruit 12 feet.
Young trees should be watered morning and evening in dry summers, and
old ones should have the earth dug away from the upper part of the
roots from November to March, then the earth, mixed with dung or soap
ashes, replaced. Moss was carefully to be scraped off the trees with
the back of an old knife, and, to prevent it, the trees manured with
swine's dung. Minute distinctions are given as to pruning and washing
the trees with strong brine of water and salt, either with a garden
pump placed in a tub or with 'squirtes which have many hoales', the
forerunner of modern spraying.
Cider was then mostly made in the west, as in Devonshire and Cornwall,
and perry in Worcestershire and Gloucestershire; but he leaves out
Herefordshire, where it was certainly made at this time.[310]
A curious help to fattening beasts, says Markham, is a lean horse or
two kept with them, for the beasts delight to feed with them.
Fattening cattle were to have first bite at the pastures, then draught
cattle, and then sheep; after Midsummer, when there is an
extraordinary sweetness in the grass, suffer the cattle to eat the
grass closer till Lammas (August 1). Though some do not hold with him,
he thinks reading and writing not unprofitable to a husbandman, but
not much material 'to his bailiff'; for there is more trust in an
honest score chalked on a trencher than 'in a commen writen scrowle'.
Landowners derived a good income from their woods and coppices. An
acre of underwood of twenty-one years' growth, was at this time worth
from £20 to £30; of twelve years' growth, £5 to £6; but on many of the
best lands it was only cut every thirty years.[311]
In 1742-3 oak timber was worth from 15d. to 18d. per cubic foot and
ash about 10d. During the Napoleonic war oak sold for 4s. 6d. a foot.
In Blyth's _Improver Improved_ we have one of the first accounts of
covered drains. The draining trench was to be made deep enough to go
the bottom of the 'cold spewing moist water' that feeds the flags and
the rushes; as for the width 'use thine own liberty' but be sure make
it as straight as possible. The bottom was to be filled in with
faggots or stones to a depth of 15 inches, a method in some parts
retained till comparatively modern times, with the top turf laid upon
them grass downward, and the drain filled in with the earth dug out of
it.
A country gentleman at this date could keep up a good establishment on
an income which to-day would compel him to live economically in a
cottage. From the accounts of Mr. Master, a landowner near
Chiselhurst, it appears that a man with an income of £300 or £400 a
year could live in some luxury, keep a stud of horses, and a
considerable number of servants.[312] Some of them had no scruples
about adding to their incomes by turning corn-dealers, even selling
such small quantities as pecks of peas, bushels of rye, and half pecks
of oatmeal. From the accounts of one of them, Henry Best,[313] of
Elmswell, we learn many valuable details concerning farming in
Yorkshire about 1641. It was the custom to put the ram to the ewes
about October 18, but Best did so about Michaelmas, and generally used
one ram to 30 or 40 ewes, and he considered it necessary that the ewes
should be two-shear. 'Good handsome ewes', he says, could have been
bought at Kilham fair for 3s. 6d. each, a price far below the average
of the time. As for wages, mowers of grass had 10d. a day, and found
their own food and their scythes, which cost them about 2s. 3d. each.
Haymakers got 4d. a day, and had to 'meat themselves' and find their
own forks and rakes. Shearers or reapers were paid from 8d. to 10d.,
and found their own sickles; binders and stackers, 8d.; mowers of
'haver', or oats, 10d., a good mower cutting 4 acres a day. In 1641 he
sold oats for 14s. a quarter, best barley for 22s., rye 27s. 6d.,
wheat 30s.[314] The roads were dreadful, and produce nearly all sent
to market on pack-horses. 'Wee seldome send fewer than 8 horse loads
to the market at a time, and with them two men, for one man cannot
guide the poakes (sacks) of above four horses. When wee sende oats to
the market wee sack them up in 3 bushel poakes and lay 6 bushels on a
horse; when wee sende wheate, rye, or masseldene (rye and wheat) and
barley to market wee put it into mette poakes (2 bushel sacks),
sometimes into half quarter sacks, and these we lay on horses that are
short coupled and well backed.' When the servants got to market they
were charged a halfpenny a horse for stabling and hay, but if they
dined at the inn they paid nothing for their horses, and their dinners
cost them 4d. a head. Butter was sold by the lb., or the 'cake' of 2
lb., and in the beginning of Lent was 5d. a lb., by April 20, 3d., in
the middle of May, 2-1/2d. When William Pinder took 50 acres of land
'of my Lord Haye' he paid a fine of £60 and a rent of £40; but this
must have been an extremely choice piece of land, for arable land
rented apparently at less than 3s. an acre.[315] The rent of a cottage
was usually 10s. a year, 'though they have not so much as a yard or
any backe side belonging to them.' There is more evidence, if such
were needed, of the beneficial effect of enclosure, which was said to
treble the value of pasture. Good meadow land fetched a great price:
'The medow Sykes is about 5 acres of grounde, and was letten in the
year 1628 at £6 per annum, and in 1635 at £6 13s. 4d.
The requirements of a foreman on a farm were that he could sow, mow,
stack peas, go well with 4 horses, and be accustomed to marketing; and
for this when hired by the year he received 5 marks, and perhaps half
a crown as earnest money. The next man got 50s., the next 46s. 6d.,
the fourth 35s. 'Christopher Pearson had the first year he dwelt here
£3 5s. 0d. wages per annum and 5s. to a God's penny (earnest money);
next year he had £4 wages, and he was both a good seedsman,' before
the invention of drills a very valuable qualification, 'and did sow
all our seed both the years. When you are about to hire a servant you
are to call them aside and talk privately with them concerning their
wage, and if the servants stand in the churchyard they usually call
them aside and walk to the back side of the church and there treat of
their wage. I heard a servant asked what he could do, who made this
answer:
"I can sowe,
I can mowe,
And I can stacke;
And I can doe
My master too
When my master turns his backe".'
If we are to judge by the food provided for the thatchers, who were
little better than ordinary labourers, the Yorkshire farm-hand fared
well on plenty of simple food, his three meals a day consisting of
butter, milk, cheese, and either eggs, pies, or bacon, sometimes
porridge instead of milk.
Probably, however, few country gentlemen were such industrious farmers
as Best; many of them passed their days mostly in hunting and fowling
and their evenings in drinking, though we know too that there were
exceptions who did not care for this rude existence. Deer hunting, and
we must add deer poaching, was the great sport of the wealthy, but the
smaller gentry had to be content with simpler forms of the chase. For
fox hunting each squire had his own little pack, and hunted only over
his own estate and those of his friends. He had also the otter, the
badger, and the hare to amuse him. Fowling was conducted, as in the
Middle Ages, by hawk or net, for the shot gun had not yet come into
use, and was forbidden by an old law.[316] The partridge and pheasant,
as now, were the chief game birds. After the Restoration the country
gentlemen seem to have been infected by the dissipation of the Court,
and farming was left to the tenant farmer and yeoman: 'our gentry',
says Pepys, 'have grown ignorant of everything in good husbandry.'
The middle of the seventeenth century was the Golden Age of the
yeoman who owned and farmed his land; even at the end of the Stuart
period, when their decline had already begun, Gregory King estimated
their numbers at 160,000 families, or about one-seventh of the
population. The class included all those between the man who owned
freehold land worth 40s. a year and the wealthier yeoman who was
hardly distinguishable from the small gentleman. Owning their own
land they were a sturdy and independent class, and they 'took a jolly
pride in voting as in fighting on the opposite side of the
neighbouring squire'. 'The yeomanry', wrote Fuller, 'is an estate of
people almost peculiar to England;' he 'wears russet clothes but
makes golden payment, having tin in his buttons and silver in his
pocket He seldom goes abroad, and his credit stretches farther than
his travel.' The tenant farmers were nearly as numerous, King
estimating them at 150,000 families; economically they were about on
a level with the yeoman, their social standing, however, was
considerably inferior.
The greatest improvement of the seventeenth century, the introduction
from Holland of turnips and clover, was over-estimated by its author,
Sir Richard Weston; for he tells his sons that by sowing flax,
turnips, and clover they might in five years improve 500 acres of poor
land so as to bring in £7,000 a year.[317] To bring about this
desirable consummation, he provides his sons with accounts as to the
cost, one of which shows the cost of growing an acre of flax and the
profit thereon, though this gentleman's estimates are clearly
optimistic:
DR. £ s. d.
Devonshiring, i.e. paring and burning 1 0 0
Lime 0 12 0
Ploughing and harrowing 0 6 0
3 bushels of seed 2 0 0
Weeding 0 1 0
Pulling and binding 0 10 0
Grassing the seed from the flax 0 6 0
Watering, drying, swinging, and beating 4 10 0
----------
£9 5 0
==========
CR. £ s. d.
900 lb. of flax 40 0 0
9 5 0
-----------
Balance profit £30 15 0
===========
Turnips were to come after flax, and were to be given to the cows as
they did in Flanders; that is, wash them clean, put them in a trough
where they were to be stamped together with a spitter or small spade;
and the turnips were to be followed by clover. All these, says Weston,
were already grown in England, but 'there is as much difference
between what groweth here and there as is between the same thing which
groweth in a garden and that which groweth wild in the fields'.
Worlidge soon after recommended that clover be sown on barley or oats
about the end of March or in April, and harrowed in, or by itself; and
says, with optimism equal to Weston's, one acre of clover will feed
you as many cows as 6 acres of ordinary grass and make the milk
richer.[318]
It has been noticed that the price of wool altered little during the
century, and from the private accounts of Sir Abel Barker[319] of
Hambleton, in the County of Rutland, we learn that in 1642 he sold his
wool to his 'loving friend Mr. William Gladstone' for £1 a tod, though
by 1648 it had gone up to 29s., a good price for those days. During
the Civil War some of Barker's horses were carried off for the service
of the State, and he values them at £8 a piece, a fair price then.
Some years later, for mowing 44 acres of grass he sets down in his
account £2 7s. 0d., for making the same £2 3s. 0d., and stacking it
3s.
Simon Hartlib, a Dutchman by birth and a friend of John Milton,
published his _Legacy_ in 1651, containing both rash statements and
useful information. We certainly cannot believe him when he states
that pasture employs more hands than tillage. His estimate of a good
crop of wheat was from 12 to 16 bushels per acre, and he speaks
strongly of the great fluctuations in prices, for he had known barley
sell at Northampton at 6d. a bushel, and within 12 months at 5s., and
wheat in London in one year varied from 3s. 6d. to 15s. a bushel. The
enormous number of dovecotes was still a great nuisance, and the
pigeons were reckoned to eat 6,000,000 quarters of grain annually.
Hartlib recommends his countrymen to sow 'a seed commonly called Saint
Foine, which in England is as much as to say Holy Hay,' as they do in
France: especially on barren lands, advice which some of them
followed, and in Wilts., soon after, sainfoin is said to have so
improved poor land that from a noble (6s. 8d.) per acre, the rent had
increased to 30s.[320] They were also to use 'another sort of fodder
which they call La Lucern at Paris for dry and barren grounds'. So
wasteful were they of labour in some parts that in Kent were to be
seen 12 horses and oxen drawing one plough.[321]
The use of the spade was long looked askance at by English husbandmen;
old men in Surrey had told Hartlib that they knew the first gardeners
that came into those parts to plant cabbages and 'colleflowers', and
to sow turnips, carrots, and parsnips, and that they gave £8 an acre
for their land. The latter statement must be an exaggeration, as it is
equivalent to a rent of about £40 in our money; but we may give some
credence to him when he says that the owner was anxious lest the spade
should spoil his ground, 'so ignorant were we of gardening in those
days.' Though it was not the case in Elizabeth's time, by now the
licorice, saffron, cherries, apples, pears, hops, and cabbages of
England were the best in the world; but many things were deficient,
for instance, many onions came from Flanders and Spain, madder from
Zealand, and roses from France.[322] 'It is a great deficiency in
England that we have not more orchards planted. It is true that in
Kent, and about London, and in Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, and
Worcestershire[323] there are many gallant orchards, but in other
country places they are very rare and thin, I know in Kent some
advance their ground from 5s. per acre to £5 by this means', and 30
acres of cherries near Sittingbourne had realized £1,000 in one year.
His recipe for making old fruit trees bear well savours of a time
when old women were still burnt as witches. 'First split his root,
then apply a compost of pigeon's dung, lees of wine, or stale wine,
and a little brimstone'. The tithes of wine in Gloucestershire were
'in divers parishes considerably great', and wine was then made in
Kent and Surrey, notably by Sir Peter Ricard, who made 6 or 8
hogsheads yearly.[324] There is no doubt that the vine has been grown
in the open in England from very early times until comparatively
recent ones. The Britons were taught to plant it by the Romans in A.D.
280.[325] In Domesday there are 38 examples of vineyards, chiefly in
the south central counties. Neckham, who wrote in the twelfth century,
says the vineyard was an important adjunct to the mediaeval
mansion.[326] William of Malmesbury praised the vines and wine of
Gloucestershire; and says that the vine was either allowed to trail on
the ground, or trained to small stakes fixed to each plant. Indeed,
the mention of them in mediaeval chronicles is frequent.
Two bushels of green grapes in 1332 fetched 7s. 6d.[327] Richard II
planted vines in great plenty, according to Stow, within the upper
park of Windsor, and sold some part to his people. The wine made in
England was sweetened with honey, and probably flavoured and coloured
with blackberries.[328] At the dissolution of the monasteries there
was a vineyard at Barking Nunnery. 'We might have a reasonable good
wine growing in many places of this realme', says Barnaby Googe, about
1577, 'as doubtless we had immediately after the Conquest, tyll,
partly by slothfulnesse, partly by civil discord long continued, it
was left, and so with time lost.... There is besides Nottingham an
ancient house called Chylwel in which remaineth yet as an ancient
monument in a great wyndowe of glasse, the whole order of planting,
proyning, stamping, and pressing of vines. Upon many cliffes and hills
are yet to be seen the rootes and old remaines of vines.' Plot, in his
_Natural History of Staffordshire_,[329] says 'the vine has been
improved by Sir Henry Lyttelton at Over (Upper) Arley, which is
situate low and warm, so that he has made wine there undistinguishable
from the best French by the most judicious palates, but this I suppose
was done only in some over hot summer, and Dr. Bathurst made very good
claret at Oxon in 1685, a very mean year for the purpose.' In 1720 the
famous vineyard at Bath of 6 acres, planted with the 'white muscadene'
and the 'black Chester grape,' produced 66 hogsheads of wine worth £10
a hogshead, but in unfavourable years grew very little.'[330] Mr.
Peter Collinson, writing from Middlesex in 1747, says, 'the vineyards
turn to good profit, much wine being made this year in England;' and
again in 1748, 'my vineyards are very ripe; a considerable quantity of
wine will this year be made in England.'[331] However, the attempt
made to grow vines on the undercliff at Ventnor at the end of the
eighteenth century by Sir Richard Worsley ended in dismal failure, and
it is probable that the English climate in its normal years seldom
produced good grapes out of doors whatever it may have done in
exceptionally hot ones, unless we assume that it has changed
considerably, for which there is little ground.
Hartlib was no friend of commons; they made the poor idle and trained
them for the gallows or beggary, and there were fewest poor where
there were fewest commons,[332] as in Kent--a statement re-echoed by
many observant writers; he also recommends enclosures, because they
gave warmth and consequent fertility to the soil. He tells us that an
effort had been made by James I to encourage the growth of mulberry
trees and the breeding of silkworms, the lords-lieutenant of the
different counties being urged to see to it, but it had little
effect.[333]
The number of different sorts of wheat was by this time considerable.
Hartlib gives the white, red, bearded ('which is not subject to
mildews as others'); some sorts with two rows, others with four and
six; some with one ear on a stalk, others with two; the red stalk
wheat of Bucks; winter wheat and summer wheat. There were also twenty
varieties of peas that he knew, and the white, black, naked. Scotch,
and Poland oats. Markham adds the whole straw wheat, the great brown
pollard, the white pollard, the organ, the flaxen, and the chilter
wheat.
There was a sad lack of enterprise in the breeding of stock now and
for many generations before; indeed, it may be doubted if this
important branch of farming, except perhaps in the case of sheep, was
much attended to until the time of Bakewell and the Collings. In
Elizabeth's time a Frenchman had twitted England with having only
3,000 or 4,000 horses worth anything, which was one of the reasons
that induced the Spaniards to invade us.[334] 'We are negligent, too,
in our kine, that we advance not the best species.'
The size of cattle at this date, however, seems to have been greater
than is often stated. The Report of the Select Committee on the
Cultivation of Waste Lands in 1795, states that the average weight,
dressed, of cattle at Smithfield in 1710 was only 370 lb.,[335] yet
the Household Book of Prince Henry at the commencement of the
seventeenth century says that an ox should weigh 600 lb. the four
quarters, and cost about £9 10s., a sheep about 45 lb., so that the
latter were apparently relatively smaller than the oxen. In 1603 oxen
were sold at Tostock in Suffolk weighing 1,000 lb. apiece, dead
weight.[336] According to the records of Winchester College, the oxen
sold there in the middle of the century averaged, dressed, about 575
lb.; in 1677, 35 oxen sold there averaged 730 lb. 'Some kine,' it was
said at the end of the century, 'have grown to be very bulky and a
great many are sold for £10 or £12 apiece; there was lately sold near
Bury a beast for £30, and 'twas fatted with cabbage leaves. An ox near
Ripon weighed, dressed, 13-1/4 cwt.'[337] They were, of course,
chiefly valued as beasts of draught, and no doubt the one Evelyn saw
in 1649, 'bred in Kent, 17 foot in length, and much higher than I
could reach,' was a powerful animal for this purpose. The young ones
were taught to draw by yoking two of them, together with two old ones
before and two behind, with a man on each side the young ones, 'to
keep them in order and speak them fair,' for if much beaten they
seldom did well: for the first two or three days they were worked only
three or four hours a day, but soon they worked as long as the older
ones, that is from 6 to 11, then a bait of hay and rest till 1, with
work again till 5, at least in Lancashire. They were kept in the yoke
till nine or ten years old, then turned on to the best grass in May,
and sold to the butcher.[338]
FOOTNOTES:
[286] _Surveyor's Dialogue_ (ed. 1608), p. 2.
[287] _Surveyor's Dialogue_, p. 188.
[288] Ibid. p. 207.
[289] _Victoria County History: Devon, Agriculture_.
[290] _Herefordshire Orchards a Pattern for All England_ (ed. 1724).
[291] See infra, p. 136.
[292] These extracts are from the original edition in the Bodleian
Library.
[293] 'The Flanders cherry excels', says Worlidge, _Syst. Agr._, p.
97.
[294] Bradley, in 1726, gives a long list of pears all with French
names, hardly any of which are now known in England.
[295] Worlidge, _Systema Agriculturae_, p. 107.
[296] _Annotation upon the Legacie of Husbandry_, 1651, p. 105.
[297] Markham, i. 174 (ed. 1635).
[298] _Systema Agriculturae_, p. 152.
[299] Evelyn, _Pomona_ (ed. 1664), p. 2.
[300] _Compleat Husbandman_ (ed. 1659), p. 75.
[301] _Most Approved and Long Experienced Waterworks_. London, 1610.
[302] See Worlidge, _Systema Agriculturae_ (ed. 1669), p. 155.
[303] Tooke, _History of Prices_, i. 23.
[304] _Life of Sir S. D'Ewes_, i. 180.
[305] _Calendar of State Papers, Domestic_, 1629-31, p. 414.
[306] _Whole Art of Husbandry_ (ed. 1635), i. 50.
[307] Ibid. i. 100.
[308] Ibid. i. 121.
[309] An astonishing statement; cf. Denton, _England in the Fifteenth
Century_, p. 56, Neckham, _De Natura Rerum_, cap. clxvi. and above, p.
93.
[310] _Whole Art of Husbandry_ (ed. 1635), i. 173.
[311] _Whole Art of Husbandry_ (ed. 1635), ii. 144. and MS. accounts
of Mr. Chevallier of Aspall Hall, Suffolk.
[312] Thorold Rogers, _History of Agriculture and Prices_, v. 28.
[313] _Farming and Account Books of Henry Best of Elmswell_, 1641,
Surtees Society, xxxiii. 157.
[314] Ibid. p. 99.
[315] _Farming and Account Books of Henry Best of Elmswell_, 1641.
Surtees Society, xxxiii. 124. Many districts in the north of England
were still much behind the rest of the country.
[316] Trevelyan, _England under the Stuarts_, 8 sq. Though, as we have
seen, p. 157, the writer of the _Fruiterer's Secrets_ recommends the
gun for scaring birds in 1604.
[317] _The Husbandry of Brabant and Flanders_ (ed. 1652), p. 18.
[318] _Systema Agriculturae_, p. 26.
[319] MS. accounts of Sir Abel Barker, in the possession of G.W.P.
Conant, Esq.
[320] Worlidge, _Systema Agriculturae_, p. 28.
[321] _Compleat Husbandman_ (1659), p. 5.
[322] Ibid. p. 9.
[323] Cf. supra, p. 136.
[324] _Compleat Husbandman_ (1659), p. 23.
[325] _Archaeologia_, i. 324; iii. 53.
[326] _De Natura Rerum_, Rolls Ser., lxi.
[327] Denton, _England in the Fifteenth Century_, 57 n.
[328] Ibid.
[329] Ed. 1686, p. 380.
[330] R. Bradley, _A General Treatise of Husbandry_ (ed. 1726), ii.
52.
[331] Tooke, _History of Prices_ i. 44. Brandy was made in the
eighteenth century from grapes grown in the Beaulieu vineyards in
Hampshire, and a bottle of it long kept at the abbey.--_Hampshire
Notes and Queries_, vi. 62. There are two vineyards to-day, of 2-3/4
and 4 acres respectively, on the estates of the Marquis of Bute in
Glamorganshire; but a vintage is only obtained once in four or five
years from them, and they are not profitable.
[332] _Compleat Husbandman_, 1659, p, 42.
[333] _Compleat Husbandman_, 1659, p. 57.
[334] Ibid. p. 73.
[335] In this apparently repeating Davenant's statement. See
McCulloch, _Commercial Dictionary_, 1852, p. 271.
[336] Thorold Rogers, _History of Agriculture and Prices_, v. 332.
[337] Houghton, _Collections for Improvement of Husbandry_, i. 294.
[338] Ibid., _Collections for Husbandry and Trade_ (ed. 1728), iv.
336.
CHAPTER XIII
KING--CORN LAWS
From what has been said in the preceding pages, it will be gathered
that a vast amount of compassion has been wasted on the enclosure of
commons, for it is abundantly evident from contemporary writers that
there were a large number of people dragging out a miserable existence
on them, by living on the produce of a cow or two, or some sheep and a
few poultry, with what game they could sometimes catch, and refusing
regular work. Dymock, Hartlib's contemporary, questions 'whether
commons do not rather make poore by causing idlenesse than maintaine
them;' and he also asks how it is that there are fewest poor where
there are fewest commons.
In the common fields, too, there was continual strife and contention
caused by the infinite number of trespasses that they were subject
to.[339] The absence of hedges, too, in these great open fields was
bad for the crops, for there was nothing to mitigate drying and
scorching winds, while in the open waste and meadows the live stock
must have sadly needed shelter and shade, 'losing more flesh in one
hot day than they gained in three cool days.' Worlidge, a Hampshire
man, joins in the chorus of praise of enclosures, for they brought
employment to the poor, and maintained treble 'the number of
inhabitants' that the open fields did; and he gives further proof of
the enclosure of land in the seventeenth century, when he mentions
'the great quantities of land that have within our memories lain open,
and in common of little value, yet when enclosed have proved excellent
good land.' Why then was this most obvious improvement not more
generally effected? Because there was a great impediment to it in the
numerous interests and diversity of titles and claims to almost every
common field and piece of waste land in England, whereby one or more
envious or ignorant persons could thwart the will of the
majority.[340] Another hindrance, he says, was that many roads passed
over the commons and wastes, which a statute was needed to stop.
In the seventeenth century hop growing was not nearly so common in
England as in the preceding, when Harrison had said, in his
_Description of Britain_, 'there are few farmers or occupiers in the
country which have not gardens and hops growing of their own, and
those far better than do come from Flanders.' There seems, indeed, to
have been a prejudice against the hop; Worlidge[341] says it was
esteemed an unwholesome herb for the use it was usually put to, 'which
may also be supplied with several other wholesome and better herbs.'
John Evelyn was very much against them, probably because he was such
an advocate of cider: 'It is little more than an age,' he says, 'since
hopps transmuted our wholesome ale into beer, which doubtless much
altered our constitutions. That one ingredient, by some not unworthily
suspected, preserving drink indeed, and so by custom made agreeable,
yet repaying the pleasure with tormenting diseases, and a shorter
life, may deservedly abate our fondness for it, especially if with
this be considered likewise the casualties in planting it, as seldom
succeeding more than once in three years.'[342] The City of London
petitioned against hops as spoiling the taste of drink.
Yet its cultivation is said to have advanced the price of land to £40,
£50, and sometimes £100 an acre, the latter an almost incredible price
if we consider the value of money then. There were not enough planted
to serve the kingdom, and Flemish hops had to be imported, though not
nearly so good as English. A great deal of dishonesty, moreover, was
shown by the foreign importers, so that in 1603 a statute (1 Jac. I,
c. 18) was passed against the 'false packinge of forreine hops,' by
which it appears that the sacks were filled up with leaves, stalks,
powder, sand, straw, wood, and even soil, for increasing the weight,
by which English growers it is said lost £20,000 a year. Such hops
were to be forfeited, and brewers using them were to forfeit their
value. The chief cause of their decrease was that few farmers would
take the trouble and care required to grow them, in spite of the often
excellent prices, which at Winchester at this date averaged from 50s.
to 80s. a cwt., sometimes, however, reaching over 200s., as in 1665
and 1687, though then as now they were subject to great fluctuations,
and in 1691 were only 31s. Many, too, were discouraged by the fact
'they are the most of any plant that grows subject to the various
mutations of the air, mildews sometimes totally destroying them,' no
doubt an allusion to the aphis blight. Hop yards were often protected
at this early date by hedges of tall trees, usually ash or poplar, the
elm being disapproved of as contracting mildews. Markham[343] says
that Hertfordshire then contained as good hops as he had seen
anywhere, and there the custom was 250 hills to every rood, 'and every
hill will bear 2-1/2 lb., worth on an average 4 nobles a cwt. (a noble
= 6s. 8d.);' hills were to be 6 ft. apart at least, poles 16 to 18 ft.
long and 9 or 10 inches in circumference at the butt, of ash, oak,
beech, alder, maple or willow.
Some planted the hills in 'plain squares chequerwise, which is the
best way if you intend to plough with horses between the hills. Others
plant them in form of a quincunx, which is better for the hop, and
will do very well where your ground is but small that you may overcome
it with either the breast plough or spade.' The manure recommended by
Worlidge was good mould, or dung and earth mixed. The hills were like
mole-hills 3 feet high, and sometimes were large enough to have as
many as 20 poles, so that some hop yards must have looked very
different then from what they do now, even when poles are retained;
but from two to five poles per hill was the more usual number.
Cultivation was much the same as in Reynold Scott's time, and picking
was still done on a 'floor' prepared by levelling the hills, watering,
treading, and sweeping the ground, round which the pickers sat and
picked into baskets, but the hop crib was also used.
It was considered better not to let the hops get too ripe, as the
growers were aware of the value of a fresh, green-looking sample; and
Worlidge advises the careful exclusion of leaves and stalks, though
Markham does not agree with him. Kilns were of two sorts: the English
kiln made of wood, lath, and clay; the French of brick, lime, and
sand, not so liable to burn as the former and therefore better.[344]
One method of drying was finely to bed the kiln with wheat straw laid
on the hair-cloth, the hops being spread 8 inches thick over this,
'and then you shall keepe a fire a little more fervent than for the
drying of a kiln full of malt,' the fire not to be of wood, for that
made the hops smoky and tasted the beer, but of straw! Worlidge,
strangely, recommended the bed of the kiln to be covered with tin, as
much better than hair-cloth, for then any sort of fuel would do as
well as charcoal, since the smoke did not pass through the hops.
Besides Hertfordshire, Northamptonshire, Oxfordshire, Leicestershire,
and Rutlandshire; Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire were recommended by
Markham for hop growing, the great hop counties of to-day being passed
over by him.
The growth of hemp and flax had by this time considerably decayed,
owing to the want of encouragement to trade in these commodities, the
lack of experience in growing them, and the tithes which in some years
amounted to more than the profits.[345] An acre of good flax was worth
from £7 to £12; but if 'wrought up fit to sell in the market' from £15
to £20.
Woad was considered a 'very rich commodity', but according to Blyth it
robbed the land if long continued upon it, although if moderately used
it prepared land for corn, drawing a 'different juice from what the
corn requires'. It more than doubled the rent of land, and had been
sold at from £6 to £20 a ton, the produce of an acre. John Lawrence,
who wrote in the first quarter of the eighteenth century, says woad
was in his time cultivated by companies of people, men, women, and
children, who hired the land, built huts, and grew and prepared the
crop for the dyer's use, then moved on to another place.[346]
There were proofs that man's inventive genius was at work among farm
implements. Worlidge mentions[347] an engine for setting corn,
invented by Gabriel Plat, made of two boards bored with wide holes 4
in. apart, set in a frame, with a funnel to each hole. It was fitted
with iron pins 5 in. long to 'play up and down', and dibble holes into
which the corn was to go from the funnels. This machine was so
intricate and clumsy that Worlidge found no use for it. However, he
recommends another instrument which certainly seems to anticipate
Tull's drill, though Tull is said to have stated when Bradley showed
him a cut of it that it was only a proposal and it never got farther
than the cut.[348] It consisted of a frame of small square pieces of
timber 2 inches thick; the breadth of the frame 2 feet, the height 18
inches, length 4 feet, placed on four good-sized wheels. In the middle
of the frame a coulter was fixed to make a furrow for the corn, which
fell through a wooden pipe behind, that dropped the corn out of a
hopper containing about a bushel, the fall of the corn from the hopper
being regulated by a wooden wheel in its neck. The same frame might
contain two coulters, pipes, and hoppers, and the instrument could be
worked with one horse and one man. It was considered a great advance
on sowing broadcast, and by the use of it 'you may also cover your
grain with any rich compost you shall prepare for that purpose, either
with pigeon dung, dry or granulated, or any other saline or lixirial
(alkaline, or of potash) substance, which may drop after the corn from
another hopper behind the one that drops the corn, or from a separate
drill'. The corn thus sown in rows was found easier to weed and hoe,
so that it is clear that this advantage was well understood before
Tull's time.
There was a great diversity of ploughs at this date, almost every
county having some variation.[349] The principal sorts were the
double-wheel plough, useful upon hard land, usually drawn with horses
or oxen two abreast, the wheels 18 in. to 20 in. high. The one-wheel
plough, which could be used on almost any sort of land; it was very
'light and nimble', so that it could be drawn by one horse and held by
one man, and thus ploughed an acre a day.
Then there was a 'plain plough without either wheel or foot', very
easy to work and fit for any lands; a double plough worked by four
horses and two men, of two kinds, one ploughing a double furrow, the
other a double depth.
There were also ploughs with a harrow attached, others constructed to
plough, sow, and harrow, but not of much value; and a turfing plough
for burning sod. Carts and waggons were of many sorts, according to
the locality, the greater wheels of the waggon being usually 18 feet
in circumference the lesser 9 feet. A useful implement was the
trenching plough used on grass land to cut out the sides of trenches
or drains, with a long handle and beam and with a coulter or knife
fixed in it and sometimes a wheel or wheels. The following is a list
of other implements then considered necessary for a farm.
_For the field._
Harrows Mole spear Beetles
Forks Mole traps Roller
Sickles Weedhooks Cradle scythe
Reaphooks Pitchforks Seedlip[350]
Sledds Rakes
_For the barn and stable._
Flails Pannels (pillions) Pails
Winnowing fan Pack-saddles Mane combs
Sieves Cart lines Goads
Sacks Ladders Yokes
Bins Corn measures Wanteyes[351]
Curry combs Brooms Suffingles (surcingles?)
Whips Skeps (baskets) Screens for corn.
Harness
_For the meadows and pastures._
Scythes Pitchforks Cutting spade for hayrick
Rakes Fetters and clogs Horse-locks.
Besides many tools.
A considerable variety of manures were in use, chalk, lime, marl,
fuller's earth, clay, sand, sea-weed, river-weed, oyster shells, fish,
dung, ashes, soot, salt, rags, hair, malt dust, bones, horns, and the
bark of trees. Of the oyster shells Worlidge says, 'I am credibly
informed that an ingenious gentleman living near the seaside laid on
his lands great quantities, which made his neighbours laugh at him (as
usually they do at anything besides their own clownish road or custom
of ignorance),' and after a year or two's exposure to the weather
'they exceedingly enriched his land for many years after.' The bones
then used were marrow-bones and fish bones, or 'whatever hath any
oiliness or fatness in it', but the bones of horses and other animals
were also used, burnt before being applied to the land, crushing not
being thought of till many years after.
In 1688 Gregory King,[352] who was much more accurate than most
statisticians of his time, gave the following estimate of the land of
England and Wales:--
Acres. Per acre.
Arable 9,000,000 worth to rent 5s. 6d.
Pasture and meadow 12,000,000 " " 8s. 8d.
Woods and coppices 3,000,000 " " 5s.
Forests and parks 3,000,000 " " 3s. 8d.
Barren land 10,000,000 " " 1s.
Houses, gardens, churches, &c. 1,000,000
Water and roads 1,000,000
----------
Total: 39,000,000
He valued the live stock of England and Wales at £18-1/4 millions, and
estimated the produce of the arable land in England at:
Million Value
bushels. per bushel.
Wheat 14 3s. 6d.
Rye 10 2s. 6d.
Barley 27 2s. 0d.
Oats 16 1s. 6d.
Peas 7 2s. 6d.
Beans 4 2s. 6d.
Vetches 1 2s. 6d.
The same statistician drew up a scheme of the income and expenditure
of the 'several families' in England in 1688, the population being
5-1/2 millions[353]:--
No. of
families Class. Income.
in class.
160 Temporal lords £3,200 0 0
800 Baronets 880 0 0
600 Knights 650 0 0
3,000 Esquires 450 0 0
11,000 Gentlemen 280 0 0
2,000 Eminent merchants 400 0 0
8,000 Lesser merchants 198 0 0
10,000 Lawyers 154 0 0
2,000 Eminent clergy 72 0 0
8,000 Lesser clergy 50 0 0
Yeoman:
40,000 Freeholders of the better sort 91 0 0
120,000 Freeholders of the lesser sort 55 0 0
120,000 (Tenant) farmers 42 10 0
50,000 Shopkeepers and tradesmen 45 0 0
60,000 Artisans 38 0 0
364,000 Labouring people and outservants 15 0 0
400,000 Cottagers and paupers 6 10 0
He calculated that the freeholder of the better sort saved on an
average £8 15s. 0d. a year per family of 7; and the lesser sort £2
15s. 0d. a year with a family of 5-1/2. The tenant farmer with a
family of 5, only saved 25s. a year, while labouring families who, he
said, averaged 3-1/2 (certainly an under estimate), lost annually 7s.,
and cottagers and paupers with families of 3-1/4 (also an under
estimate) lost 16s. 3d. a year. It will thus be seen that the tenant
farmers, labourers, and cottagers, the bulk of those who worked on the
land, were very badly off; the tenant farmer saved considerably less
than the artisan. It will also be noticed that the rural population of
England was about three-quarters of the whole.[354]
The winter of 1683-4 was marked by one of the severest frosts that
have ever visited England. Ice on the Thames is said to have been
eleven inches thick; by Jan. 9 there were streets of booths on it; and
by the 24th, the frost continuing more and more severe, all sorts of
shops and trades flourished on the river, 'even to a printing press,
where the people and ladies took a fancy to have their names printed
and the day and year set down when printed on the Thames.' Coaches
plied, there was bull-baiting, horse and coach races, puppet plays and
interludes, tippling 'and other lewd places'--a regular carnival on
the water.[355] Altogether the frost which began at Christmas lasted
ninety-one days and did much damage on land, many of the trees were
split as if struck by lightning, and men and cattle perished in some
parts. Poultry and other birds and many plants and vegetables also
perished. Wheat, however, was little affected, as the average price
was under 40s. a quarter. In 1692 a series of very bad seasons
commenced, lasting, with a break in 1694, until 1698, always known as
the 'ill' or 'barren' seasons, and the cause was the usual one in
England, excessive cold and wet. In 1693 wheat was over 60s. a
quarter, and in Kent turnips were made into bread for the poor.[356]
The difference in the price of farm produce in various localities was
striking, and an eloquent testimony to the wretched means of
communication. At Newark, for instance, in 1692-3 wheat was from 36s.
to 40s. a quarter, while at Brentford it touched 76s.; next year in
the same two places it was 32s. and 86s. respectively. In 1695-6 hay
at Newark was 13s. 4d. a ton, at Northampton it was from 35s. to 40s.
In 1662 was passed the famous statute of parochial settlement, 14 Car.
II, c. 12, which forged cruel fetters for the poor, and is said to
have caused the iron of slavery to enter into the soul of the English
labourer.[357] The Act states, that the reason for passing it was the
continual increase of the poor throughout the kingdom, which had
become exceeding burdensome owing to the defects in the law. Poor
people, moreover, wandered from one parish to another in order 'to
settle where there is the best Stocke, the largest commons or wastes
to build cotages, and the most woods for them to burn and
destroy.'[358] It was therefore determined to stop these wanderings,
and most effectually was it done. Two justices were empowered to
remove any person who settled in any tenement under the yearly value
of £10 within forty days to the place where he was last legally
settled, unless he gave sufficient security for the discharge of the
parish in case he became a pauper.
It is true that certain relaxations were subsequently made. The Act of
1691, 3 W. & M., c. 2, allowed derivative settlements on payment of
taxes for one year, serving an annual office, hiring for a year, and
apprenticeship; while the Act of 1696, 8 & 9 Wm. III, c. 30, allowed
the grant of a certificate of settlement, under which safeguard the
holder could migrate to a district where his labour was required, the
new parish being assured he would not become chargeable to it, and
therefore not troubling to remove him till there was actual need: but
the statute acted as an effectual check on migration and prevented the
labourer carrying his work where it was wanted.[359] It became the
object of parishes to have as few cottages and therefore as few poor
as possible. In 'close' parishes, i.e. where all the land belonged to
one owner, as distinguished from 'open' ones where it belonged to
several, all the cottages were often pulled down so that labourers
coming to work in it had to travel long distances in all weathers. We
shall see further relaxation in the law in 1795, but it was not until
modern times that this abominable system was destroyed. The
agricultural labourer's difficulty in building a house was aggravated
by the statute 31 Eliz., c. 7, before noticed, which in order to
restrain the building of cottages enacted that none, except in towns
and certain other places, were to be built unless 4 acres of land were
attached to them, under a penalty of £10, and 40s. a month for
continuing to maintain it. This Act was not repealed until the reign
of George III. However, it seems to have been frequently winked at. In
Shropshire, for instance, the fine often was only nominal; in the
seventeenth century orders authorizing the building of cottages on the
waste were freely given by the Court of Quarter Sessions, and orders
were also made by the Court for the erection of cottages
elsewhere.[360]
At the restoration of Charles II the corn laws had practically been
unaltered since 1571,[361] when it had been enacted that corn might be
exported from certain ports in certain ships at all times when
proclamation was not made to the contrary, on a payment of 12d. a
quarter on wheat and 8d. a quarter on other grain. Now both export and
import were subjected to heavy duties, but these caused such high
prices in corn that they were reduced in 1663; yet high duties were
again imposed in 1673, which continued until the revolution. Then,
owing to good crops and low prices, which brought distress on the
landed interest, a new policy was introduced: export duties were
abolished and the other extreme resorted to, viz. a bounty on export
of 5s. in the quarter as long as the home price did not exceed 48s. At
the same time import duties remained high, and this system lasted till
1773. Never had the corn-growers of England been so thoroughly
protected, yet, owing to causes over which the legislators had no
control, namely bountiful seasons, the prices of wheat for the next
seventy years was from 15 to 20 per cent. cheaper than in the previous
forty. Modern economists have described this system as one of the
worst instances of a class using their legislative power to subsidize
themselves at the expense of the community. As a matter of fact it was
the firm conviction of the statesmen and economists of the time, that
husbandry, being the main industry and prop of England, and the
foundation on which the whole political power of the country was
based, should receive every encouragement. At all events, in many ways
the policy was successful.[362] It encouraged investment in land, and
materially assisted the agricultural improvement for which the
eighteenth century was noted, the export too employed English
shipping, and thus aided industry. Arthur Young said it was the
singular felicity of this country to have devised a plan which
accomplished the strange paradox of at once lowering the price of corn
and encouraging agriculture, for by the system in vogue till 1773 if
corn was scarce it was imported, while if there was a glut at home
export was assisted so that great fluctuations in price were
prevented.[363] It seemed of the utmost importance to men of that time
that England should be self-supporting and independent of possible
adversaries for the necessaries of life; the wisdom of the policy was
never questioned, and was accepted by statesmen of every party.[364]
To blame the landowners for adopting what seemed the wisest course to
every sensible person is merely an instance of partisan spite.
At the Peace of Paris in 1763 the question as to whether England or
France was to be the great colonizing country of the world was finally
settled, and a great development of English trade ensued. It was
accompanied by a great increase of population, exports of corn were
largely reduced, and the balance began to incline the other way, so
that the next Act of importance was that of 1773 which permitted the
import of foreign wheat at a nominal duty of 6d. a quarter when it was
over 48s., but prohibited export and the bounty on export when wheat
was at or above 44s. This was the nearest approach to free trade
before 1846.
The time, however, was not yet ripe for this, and the nominal duty on
imports was too small for landlords and farmers, so that in 1791 the
price when the same nominal duty was to come into force was raised to
54s., while between 50s. and 54s. a duty of 2s. 6d. was imposed, and
under 50s. a duty of 24s. 3d.; and export was allowed without bounty
when wheat was under 46s. Export of corn, however, by this time had
become a matter of little moment, England having definitely ceased to
be an exporting country after 1789.
Not only were English landowners after the Restoration anxious to
protect their corn, but they also took alarm at the imports of Irish
cattle which they said lowered English rents, so that in 1665 and 1680
(18 Car. II, c. 2, and 32 Car. II, c. 2) laws were framed absolutely
prohibiting the import of Irish cattle, sheep, and swine, as well as
of beef, pork, bacon, and mutton, and even butter and cheese. The
statute 12 Car. II, c. 4, also virtually excluded Irish wool from
England by duties amounting to prohibition. It was not until 1759 that
free imports of cattle from Ireland were allowed for five years,[365]
a period prolonged by 5 Geo. III, c. 10, and a statute of 1772.
In 1699 wool was allowed to be shipped from six specified ports in
Ireland to eight specified ports in England,[366] and by 16 Geo. II,
c. 11, wool might be sent from Ireland to any port in England under
certain restrictions.
FOOTNOTES:
[339] Worlidge, _Systema Agriculturae_ (ed. 1669), p. 10.
[340] Ibid. p. 124.
[341] Ibid. p. 124.
[342] _Pomona_ (ed. 1664), p. 1.
[343] Ed. 1635, Book i, p. 175.
[344] Markham, _op. cit._ i. 188.
[345] Worlidge, _Systema Agriculturae_, p. 38. Plot, however, in his
_Natural History of Staffordshire_, 1686, says hemp and flax were sown
in small quantities all over the county, p. 109.
[346] _New System of Agriculture_ (ed. 1726), p. 113. Woad is still
grown 'in some districts in England' (Morton, _Cyclopaedia of
Agriculture_, ii. 1159), but in the Agricultural Returns of 1907
apparently occupies too small an acreage to entitle it to a separate
mention.
[347] Worlidge, _Systema Agriculturae_, p. 43.
[348] Tull, in his _Horseshoeing Husbandry_ (p. 147), speaks of the
drill as if already in use.
[349] Worlidge, _Systema Agriculturae_, p. 205.
[350] The seedlip was a long-shaped basket suspended from the sower's
shoulder and was usually made of wood.
[351] Horse-girths for securing pack-saddles.
[352] Houghton, about the same time, said England contained 28 to 29
million acres, of which 12 millions lay waste (_Collections_, iv. II).
In 1907 the Board of Agriculture returned the total area of England
and Wales, excluding water, at 37,130,344 acres.
[353] Eden, _State of the Poor_, i. 228.
[354] If we allow that most of the two last classes enumerated were
country folk. For the decline of the yeoman class, see chap. xviii.
[355] Evelyn's _Diary_.
[356] Tooke, _History of Prices_, i. 23.
[357] Fowle, _Poor Law_, p. 63.
[358] Hasbach, _op. cit._ p. 66, says, 'the abuses complained of in
the preamble (of the Act) did actually exist.'
[359] Hasbach, _op. cit._ pp. 67, 134, says the statute of 1662 did
not entail so much evil by hindering migration as is generally
supposed.
[360] _Shropshire County Records_: Abstracts of the orders made by the
Court of Quarter Sessions, 1638-1782, pp. xxiv, xxv.
[361] See above, p. 70. 13 Eliz., c. 13. McCulloch, _Commercial
Dictionary_ (1852), p. 412.
[362] Cunningham, _English Industry and Commerce_, ii. 371.
[363] _Political Arithmetic_, pp. 27-34, 193, 276.
[364] Lecky, _England in the Eighteenth Century_, vi. 192.
[365] McPherson, _Annals of Commerce_, iii. 311.
[366] Ibid. ii. 706; iii. 221, 293.
CHAPTER XIV
1700-1765
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.--CROPS.--CATTLE.--
DAIRYING.--POULTRY.--TULL AND THE NEW HUSBANDRY.--BAD TIMES.
--FRUIT-GROWING
The history of agriculture in the eighteenth century is remarkable for
several features of great importance. It first saw the application of
capital in large quantities to farming, the improvements of the time
being largely initiated by rich landowners whom Young praises rightly
as public-spirited men who deserved well of their country, though
Thorold Rogers attributes a meaner motive for the improvement of their
estates, namely, their desire not to be outshone by the wealthy
merchants.[367] They were often ably assisted by tenant farmers, many
of whom were now men with considerable capital, for whom the smaller
farms were amalgamated into large ones. After the agricultural
revolution of the latter half of the century, the tendency to
consolidate small holdings into large farms grew apace and was looked
on as a decided mark of progress. This agricultural revolution was
largely a result of the industrial revolution that then took place in
England. Owing to mechanical inventions and the consequent growth of
the factory system, the great manufacturing towns arose, whence came a
great demand for food, and, to supply this demand, farms, instead of
being small self-sufficing holdings just growing enough for the
farmer and his family and servants, grew larger, and became
manufactories of corn and meat. The century was also remarkable for
another great change. England, hitherto an exporting country, became
an importing one. The progress of the century was furthered by a band
of men whose names are, or ought to be, household words with English
farmers: Jethro Tull, Lord Townshend, Arthur Young, Bakewell, Coke of
Holkham, and the Collings. Further the century witnessed a great
number of enclosures, especially when it was drawing to its close.
According to the Report of the Committee on Waste Lands in 1797, the
number of Enclosure Acts was: under Anne, 2 Acts, enclosing 1,439
acres; under Geo. I, 16 Acts, enclosing 17,960 acres; under Geo. II,
226 Acts, enclosing 318,778 acres; from 1760 to 1797, 1,532 Acts,
enclosing 2,804,197 acres.
The period from 1700 to 1765 has been called the golden age of the
agricultural classes, as the fifteenth century has been called the
golden age of the labourer, but the farmer and landlord were often
hard pressed; rates were low, wages were fair, and the demand for the
produce of the farm constant owing to the growth of the population,
yet prices for wheat, stock, and wool were often unremunerative to the
farmer, and we are told in 1734, 'necessity has compelled our farmers
to more carefulness and frugality in laying out their money than they
were accustomed to in better times.'[368] The labourer's wages varied
according to locality. The assessment of wages by the magistrates in
Lancashire for 1725 remains, and according to that the ordinary
labourer earned 10d. a day in the summer and 9d. in the winter months,
with extras in harvest, and this may be taken as the average pay at
that date. Threshing and winnowing wheat by piece-work cost 2s. a
quarter, oats 1s. a quarter. Making a ditch 4 feet wide at the top, 18
inches wide at the bottom, and 3 feet deep, double set with quicks,
cost 1s. a rood (8 yards), 10d. if without the quick.[369] The
magistrates remarked in their proclamation on the plenty of the times
and were afraid that for the northern part of the county, which was
then very backward, the wages were too liberal. Wheat was,
unfortunately, that year 46s. 1d. a quarter, but a few years before
and after that date it was cheap--20s., 24s., 28s. a quarter--and
fresh meat was only 3d. a lb., so that their wages went a long
way.[370] A considerable portion of the wages was paid in kind, not
only in drink but in food, though this custom became less frequent as
the century went on.[371]
As for his food, Eden tells us[372] that the diet of Bedford workhouse
in 1730 was much better than that of the most industrious labourer in
his own home, and this was the diet: bread and cheese or broth for
breakfast, boiled beef hot or cold, sometimes with suet pudding for
dinner, and bread and cheese or broth for supper. This must have been
sufficiently monotonous, and we may be sure the labourer at home very
seldom had boiled beef for dinner; but in the north he was much
cleverer than his southern brother in cooking cereal foods such as
oatmeal porridge, crowdie (also of oatmeal), frumenty or barley milk,
barley broth, &c.[373]
The village of the first half of the eighteenth century contained a
much better graded society than the village of to-day. It had few
gaps, so that there was a ladder from the lowest to the highest ranks,
owing to the existence of many small holders of various degree, soon
to be diminished by enclosure and consolidation.[374]
There was a great increase in the number of live stock owing to the
spread, gradual though it was, of roots and clover, which increased
the winter food; 'of late years,' it was said in 1739, 'there have
been improvements made in the breed of sheep by changing of rams, and
sowing of turnips, grass seeds, &c.'[375] Crops, too, were improving;
and enclosed lands about 1726 were said to produce over 20 bushels of
wheat to the acre.[376]
Though the number of Enclosure Acts at the beginning of the century
was nothing like the number at the end, the process was steadily going
on, often by non-parliamentary enclosure, and was approved by nearly
every one. Some, however, were opposed to it. John Cowper, who wrote
an essay on 'Enclosing Commons' in 1732, said, a common was often the
chief support of forty or fifty poor families, and even though their
rights were bought out they were under the necessity of leaving their
old homes, for their occupation was gone; but he says nothing of the
well-known increased demand for labour on the enclosed lands. The
force of his arguments may be gauged from his answer to Lawrence's
statement that enclosure is the greatest benefit to good husbandry,
and a remedy for idleness. On the contrary, says he, who among the
country people live lazier lives than the grazier and the dairyman?
All the dairyman has to do is to call his cows together to be milked!
Worlidge in 1669 had lamented that turnips were so little grown by
English farmers in the field, and that it was a plant 'usually
nourished in gardens',[377] and in a letter to Houghton in 1684, he is
the first to mention the feeding of turnips to sheep.[378] However, in
1726 it was said that nothing of late years had turned to greater
profit to the farmer, who now found it one of his chief treasures; and
there were then three sorts: the round which was most common, the
yellow, and the long.[379] For winter use they were to be sown from
the beginning of June to the middle of August, on fallow which had
been brought to a good tilth, the seed harrowed in with a bush harrow,
and if necessary rolled. When the plants had two or three leaves each
they were to be hoed out, leaving them five or six inches apart,
though some slovenly farmers did not trouble to do this; but there is
no mention of hoeing between the rows. The fly was already recognized
as a pest, and soot and common salt were used to fight it. Folding
sheep in winter on turnips was then little practised, though Lawrence
strongly recommends it. According to Defoe,[380] Suffolk was
remarkable for being the first county where the feeding and fattening
of sheep and other cattle with turnips was first practised in England,
to the great improvement of the land, 'whence', he says, 'the practice
is spread over most of the east and south, to the great enriching of
farmers and increase of fat cattle.' There were great disputes as to
collecting the tithe, always a sore subject, on turnips; and the
custom seems to have been that if they were eaten off by store sheep
they went tithe free, if sheep were fattened on them the tithe was
paid.[381]
Clover, the other great novelty of the seventeenth century, was now
generally sown with barley, oats, or rye grass, about 15 lb. per acre.
This amount, sown on 2 acres of barley, would next year produce 2
loads worth about £5. The next crop stood for seed, which was cut in
August, the hay being worth £9, and the seed out of it, 300 lb., was
sold much of it for 16d. a lb., the sum realized in that year from the
2 acres being £30, without counting the aftermath. At this time most
of the seed was still imported from Flanders.[382] Much of the common
and waste land of England, not previously worth 6d. an acre, had been
by 1732 vastly improved through sowing artificial grasses on it, so
that various people had gained considerable estates.[383]
Carrots were also now grown as a field crop in places, especially near
London, two sorts being known, the yellow and red, used chiefly by
farmers for feeding their hogs.[384] Of wheat the names were many, but
there were apparently only seven distinct sorts, the Double-eared,
Eggshell, Red or Kentish, Great-bearded, Pollard, Grey, and Flaxen or
Lammas.[385] The growth of saffron had declined, though the English
variety was the best in the world, according to Lawrence, and except
in Cambridgeshire and about Saffron Walden it was little known.
Though it was still some time before the days of Bakewell, increased
attention was given to cattle-breeding; it was urged that a
well-shaped bull be put to cows, one that had 'a broad and curled
forehead, long horns, fleshy neck, and a belly long and large.'[386]
Such in 1726 was the ideal type of the long-horns of the Midland and
the north, but it was noticed that of late years and especially in the
north the Dutch breed was much sought after, which had short horns and
long necks, the breed with which the Collings were to work such
wonders. The then great price of £20 had been given for a cow of this
breed. Bradley, Professor of Botany at Cambridge, and a well-known
writer on agriculture, divided the cattle of England into three sorts
according to their colour: the black, white, and red.[387] The black,
commonly the smallest, was the strongest for labour, chiefly found in
mountainous countries; also bred chiefly in Cheshire, Yorkshire,
Lancashire, and Derbyshire, sixty years before this, and in those days
Cheshire cheese came from these cattle, apparently very much like the
modern Welsh breed.[388] The white were much larger, and very common
in Lincolnshire at the end of the seventeenth century. They gave more
milk than the black sort but went dry sooner. They were also found in
Suffolk and Surrey.
The red cattle were the largest in England, their milk rich and
nourishing, so much so that it was given specially to consumptives.
They were first bred in Somerset, where in Bradley's time particular
attention was paid to their breeding, and were evidently the ancestors
of the modern Devons. About London these cows were often fed on
turnips, given them tops and all, which made their milk bitter. They
were also found in Lincolnshire and some other counties, where 'they
were fed on the marshes', and Defoe saw, in the Weald of Kent, 'large
Kentish bullocks, generally all red with their horns crooked inward.'
Bradley gives the following balance sheet for a dairy of nine cows:[389]
DR. £ s. d.
6 months' grass keep at 1s. 6d. per week per head 17 11 0
6 months' winter keep (straw, hay, turnips, and
grains) at 2s. per week per head 23 8 0
---------
£40 19 0
=========
CR.
13,140 gallons of milk 136 17 6
40 19 0
---------
Balance (profit) £95 18 6
=========
A correspondent, however, pointed out to Bradley that this yield and
profit was far above the average, which was about £5 a cow, on whom
Bradley retorted that it could be made, though it was exceptional.
In the eighteenth century the great trade of driving Scottish cattle
to London began, Walter Scott's grandfather being the pioneer. The
route followed diverged from the Great North Road in Yorkshire in
order to avoid turnpikes, and the cattle, grazing leisurely on the
strips of grass by the roadside, generally arrived at Smithfield in
good condition.[390]
Defoe tells us that most of the Scottish cattle which came yearly
into England were brought to the village of S. Faiths, north of
Norwich, 'where the Norfolk graziers go and buy them. These Scots
runts, coming out of the cold and barren highlands, feed so eagerly on
the rich pasture in these marshes that they grow very fat. There are
above 40,000 of these Scots cattle fed in this county every year. The
gentlemen of Galloway go to England with their droves of cattle and
take the money themselves.'[391] It was no uncommon thing for a
Galloway nobleman to send 4,000 black cattle and 4,000 sheep to
England in a year, and altogether from 50,000 to 60,000 cattle were
said to come to England from Galloway yearly. Gentlemen on the Border
before the Union got a very pretty living by tolls from these cattle;
and the Earl of Carlisle made a good income in this way.
Cattle were sometimes of a great size. In 1697, in the park of Sir
John Fagg near Steyning, Defoe saw four bullocks of Sir John's own
breeding for which was refused in Defoe's hearing £26 apiece. They
were driven to Smithfield and realized £25 each, having probably sunk
on the way, but dressed they weighed 80 stone a quarter![392] These
weights must have been very exceptional, but go to prove that cattle
then could be grown to much greater size than is generally credited. A
good price for a bullock in the first half of the eighteenth century
was from £7 to £10.
The best poultry at the same date (1736) were said to be 'the
white-feathered sort', especially those that had short and white legs,
which were esteemed for the whiteness of their flesh; but those that
had long yellow legs and yellow beaks were considered good for
nothing.[393] Care was to be used in the choice of a cock, for those
of the game kind were to be avoided as unprofitable. Bradley gives a
balance sheet for 12 hens and 2 cocks who had a free run in a farmyard
and an orchard:[394]
DR. £ s. d.
39 bushels of barley 3 5 0
Balance, profit 16 0
----------
£4 1 0
==========
CR. £ s. d.
Eggs (number unfortunately not given) 1 5 0
20 early chickens at 1s. 1 0 0
72 late chickens at 6d. 1 16 0
----------
£4 1 0
==========
He also recommends that in stocking a farm of £200 a year the
following poultry should be purchased:
£ s. d.
24 chickens at 4d. 8 0
20 geese 1 0 0
20 turkeys 1 0 0
24 ducks 12 0
6 pair of pigeons 12 0
The best way to fatten chickens, according to Bradley, was to put them
in coops and feed them with barley meal, being careful to put a small
quantity of brickdust in their water to give them an appetite.[395]
On this farm were 20 acres of cow pasture besides common, and this
with some turnips kept 9 cows, which gave about three gallons of milk
a day at least, the milk being worth 1d. a quart. His pigs were of the
'Black Bantham' breed, which were better than the large sort common in
England, for the flesh was much more delicate.
Suffolk was famous for supplying London with turkeys.[396] Three
hundred droves of turkeys, each numbering from 300 to 1000, had in one
season passed over Stratford Bridge on the road from Ipswich to
London. Geese also travelled on foot to London in prodigious numbers
from Norfolk, Suffolk, and the Fen country, often 1,000 to 3,000 in a
drove, starting in August when harvest was nearly over, so that the
geese might feed on the stubble by the way; 'and thus they hold on to
the end of October, when the roads begin to be too stiff and deep for
their broad feet and short legs to march on.' There was, however, a
more rapid method of getting poultry to the great market, by means of
carts of four stages or stories, one above another, to carry the birds
in, drawn by two horses, which by means of relays travelled night and
day, and covered as much as 100 miles in two days and one night, the
driver sitting on the topmost stage.
Hop growing in 1729, according to Richard Bradley, paid well; he says,
'ground never esteemed before worth a shilling an acre per annum, is
rendered worth forty, fifty, or sometimes more pounds a year by
planting hops judiciously. An acre of hops shall bring to the owner
clear profit about £30 yearly; but I have known hop grounds that have
cleared above £50 yearly per acre.' At this date 12,000 acres in
England were planted with hops.
The great market for hops was Stourbridge Fair, once the greatest mart
in England and still preserving much of its former importance: 'there
is scarce any price fixed for hops in England till they know how they
sell in Stourbridge Fair.'[397] Thither they came from Chelmsford,
Canterbury, Maidstone, and Farnham, where the bulk of the hops in
England were then grown, though some were to be found at Wilton near
Salisbury, in Herefordshire, and Worcestershire. Round Canterbury
Defoe says there were 6,000 acres of hops, all planted within living
memory[398]; but the Maidstone district was called 'the mother of hop
grounds', and with the country round Feversham was famous for apples
and cherries.
The finest wool still, it seems, came from near Leominster, where the
sheep in Markham's time were described as small-boned and black-faced,
with a light fleece, and apparently they still had the same appearance
at the beginning of the eighteenth century[399]; and large-boned
sheep with coarser wool were to be found in the counties of Warwick,
Leicester, Buckingham, Northampton, and Nottingham; in the north of
England too were big-boned sheep with inferior wool, the largest with
coarse wool being found in the marshes of Lincolnshire.
About this time wool had fallen much in price: 'Has nobody told you,'
writes a west country farmer to his absentee landlord in 1737, 'that
wool has fallen to near half its price, and that we cannot find
purchasers for a great part of it at any price whatsoever. When most
of our estates (farms) were taken wool was generally 7d., 8d., or more
by the pound; the same is now 4d. and still falling.'[400] But the
latter price was exceptionally low; Smith[401] gives the following
average prices per tod of 28 lb.:
1706 17s. 6d.
1717-8 23s. to 27s.
1737-42 11s. to 14s.
1743 20s.
1743-53 24s.
After 1753 it fell again, largely owing to the great plague among
cattle, which brought about a 'prodigious increase of sheep'[402];
and about 1770 Young[403] favoured corn rather than wool, for there
was always a market for the former, but the foreign demand for cloth
was diminishing, especially in the case of France, besides prohibition
of export kept down the price.[404] Yet although wool was being
deserted for corn it had in Young's time 'been so long supposed the
staple and foundation of all our wealth, that it is somewhat dangerous
to hazard an opinion not consonant to its encouragement'.
At the end of the century, however, there was a rapid increase in the
price, partly due to increased demand by spinners and weavers who,
owing to machinery, were working more economically; and partly to the
enclosure of commons, and the ploughing up of land for corn.[405]
Cheshire had long been famous for cheese. Barnaby Googe, in the last
quarter of the sixteenth century, says, 'in England the best cheese is
the Cheshyre and the Shropshyre, then the Banbury cheese, next the
Suffolk and the Essex, and the very worst the Kentish cheese.' Camden,
who died in 1623, tells us that 'the grasse and fodder (in Cheshire)
is of that goodness and vertue that cheeses be made here in great
number, and of a most pleasing and delicate taste such as all England
again affordeth not the like, no though the best dairywomen otherwise
and skillfullest in cheese making be had from hence;' and a little
later it was said no other county in the realm could compare with
Cheshire, not even that wonderful agricultural country Holland from
which England learnt so much.[406] In Lawrence's time Cheddar cheese
was also famous, and there it had long been a custom for several
neighbours to join their milk together to make cheeses, which were of
a large size, weighing from 30 lb. to 100 lb. Good cheese came also
from Gloucestershire and Warwickshire. The Cheshire men sent great
quantities by sea to London, a long and tedious voyage, or else by
land to Burton-on-Trent, and down that river to Hull and then by sea
to London. The Gloucestershire men took it to Lechlade and sent it
down the Thames; from Warwickshire it went by land all the way, or to
Oxford and thence down the Thames to London. Stilton, too, had lately
become famous, and was considered the best of all, selling for the
then great price of 1s. a lb. on the farm, and 2s. 6d. at the Bell
Inn, Stilton, where it seems to have first been sold in large
quantities, though Leicestershire perhaps claims the honour of first
making it.[407]
The eastern side of Suffolk was, in Defoe's time, famous for the best
butter and perhaps the worst cheese in England, the butter being
'barrelled and sometimes pickled up in small casks'.[408]
Rabbits were occasionally kept in large numbers for profit; at Auborne
Chase in Wilts, there was a warren of 700 acres surrounded by a
wall--a most effective way of preventing escape, but somewhat
expensive. In winter time they were fed on hay, and hazel branches
from which they ate the bark. They were never allowed to get below
8,000 head, and from these, after deducting losses by poachers,
weazles, polecats, foxes, &c., 24,000 were sold annually. These
rabbits, owing to the quality of the grass, were famous for the
sweetness of their flesh. The proprietor, Mr. Gilbert, began to kill
them at Bartholomewtide, Aug. 24, and from then to Michaelmas obtained
9s. a dozen for them delivered free in London; but those from
Michaelmas to Christmas realized 10s. 6d. a dozen.
The difference in price at the two periods is accounted for by the
fact that their skins were much better in the latter, and the rabbits
kept longer when killed; they must also have been larger. A skin
before Michaelmas was only worth 1d., but soon after nearly 6d.; and
in Hertfordshire was a warren where rabbit skins with silvery hair
fetched 1s. each.[409]
We have now reached the period when the result of Jethro Tull's
labours was given to the world, his _Horse-hoeing Husbandry_ appearing
in 1733. It is no exaggeration to say that agriculture owes more to
Tull than to any other man; the principles formulated in his famous
book revolutionized British agriculture, though we shall see that it
took a long time to do it. He has indeed been described as 'the
greatest individual improver agriculture ever knew'. He first realized
that deep and perfect pulverization is the great secret of vegetable
nutrition, and was thus led on to perfect the system of drilling seed
wide enough apart to admit of tillage in the intervals, and abandoning
the wide ridges in vogue, laid the land into narrow ridges 5 feet or 6
feet wide. He was born at Basildon in Berkshire, heir to a good
estate, and was called to the bar in 1699, but on his marriage in the
same year settled on the paternal farm of Howberry in Oxfordshire. In
his preface to his book he throws a flash of light on country life at
a time when the roads were nearly as bad as in the Middle Ages, so
that they effectually isolated different parts of England, when he
speaks of 'a long confinement within the limits of a lonely farm, in a
country where I am a stranger, having debarred me from all
conversation'.[410]
He took to agriculture more by necessity than by choice, for he knew
too much 'the inconveniency and slavery attending the exorbitant power
of husbandry servants', and he further gives this extraordinary
character of the farm labourer of his day: ''Tis the most formidable
objection against our agriculture that the defection of labourers is
such that few gentlemen can keep their land in their own hands, but
let them for a little to tenants who can bear to be insulted,
assaulted, kicked, cuffed, and Bridewelled, with more patience than
gentlemen are endowed with.'[411] Tull wrote just before it became the
fashion for gentlemen to go into farming, and laments that the lands
of the country were all, or mostly, in the hands of rack-renters,
whose supposed interest it was that they should never be improved for
fear of fines and increased rents. Gentlemen then knew so little of
farming that they were unable to manage their estates. No doubt his
scathing remarks helped to initiate the well-known change in this
respect, and soon, over all England, gentlemen of education and
position were engaged in removing this reproach from their class. The
same complaint as to their ignorance of matters connected with their
land crops up again during the great French war, but they then had a
good excuse, as they were busy fighting the French.
Tull invented his drill about 1701 at Howberry. The first occasion for
making it, he says, was that it 'was very difficult to find a man that
could sow clover tolerably; they had a habit to throw it once with the
hand to two large strides and go twice in each cast; thus, with 9 or
10 lb. of seed to an acre, two-thirds of the ground was unplanted. To
remedy this I made a hopper, to be drawn by a boy, that planted an
acre sufficiently with 6 lb. of seed; but when I added to this hopper
an exceeding light plough that made 6 channels eight inches asunder,
into which 2 lb. to an acre being drilled the ground was as well
planted. This drill was easily drawn by a man, and sometimes by a
boy.'
His invention was largely prompted by his desire to do without the
insolent farm servant whom he has described above, and the year after
it was invented he certainly had his wish, for they struck in a body
and were dismissed: 'it were more easy to teach the beasts of the
field than to drive the ploughman out of his way.'
His ideas were largely derived from the mechanism of the organ which,
being fond of music, he had mastered in his youth--a rotary mechanism,
which is the foundation of all agricultural sowing implements. His
first invention may be described as a drill plough to sow wheat and
turnip seed in drills three rows at a time, a harrow to cover the seed
being attached. Afterwards he invented a turnip drill, so arranged as
regards dropping the seed and its subsequent covering with soil that
half the seed should come up earlier than the rest, to enable a
portion at least to escape the dreaded fly. He was a great believer in
doing everything himself, and worked so hard at his drill that he had
to go abroad for his health. He was somewhat carried away by his
invention, and asserts that the expense of a drilled crop of wheat was
one-ninth of that sown in the old way, giving the following figures to
prove his assertion:
_The Old Way_
£ s. d.
Seed, 2-1/2 bushels, at 3s. 7 6
Three ploughings, harrrowing, and sowing 16 0
Weeding 2 0
Rent of preceding fallow 10 0
Manure 2 10 0
Reaping 4 6
---------
£ 4 10 0[412]
=========
_The New Way_
Seed, 3 pecks 2 3
Tillage 4 0
Drilling 6
Weeding 6
Uncovering (removing clods fallen on the wheat) 2
Brine and lime 1
Reaping 2 6
-----
10 0
=====
It should be noted that he has omitted to charge rent for the year in
which the crop was grown in both cases.
He considered fallowing and manure unnecessary, and grew without
manure 13 successive wheat crops on the same piece of ground, getting
better crops than his neighbours who pursued the ordinary course of
farming. His three great principles, indeed, were drilling, reduction
of seed, and absence of weeds, and he saw that dung was a great
carrier of the latter but lacked a due appreciation of its chemical
action. Of course, like all _improvers_, he was met with unlimited
opposition, and on the publication of his book he was assailed with
abuse, which, being a sensitive man, caused him extreme annoyance. His
health was bad, his troubles with his labourers unending, his son a
spendthrift, and he died at his now famous home, Prosperous Farm, near
Hungerford, in 1741, having said not long before his death, 'Some,
allowed as good judges, have upon a full view and examination of my
practice declared their opinion that it would one day become the
general husbandry of England.'[413] Scotland was the first to perceive
the merits of the system, and it gradually worked southwards into
England, but for many years had to fight against ignorance and
prejudice, even so intelligent a man as Arthur Young being opposed to
it.
Farm leases had by this time assumed their modern form, and
cultivation clauses were numerous. In one of 1732, at Hawsted, the
tenant was to keep the hedges in repair, being allowed bushes and
stakes for so doing. He was also to bestow on some part of the lands
one load of good rotten muck over and above what was made on the farm
for every load of hay, straw, or stover (fodder) which he should carry
off.[414] In another of 1740, he was to leave in the last year of the
tenancy one-third of the arable land summer tilled, ploughed, and
fallowed, for which he was to be paid according to the custom of the
country. In 1753, in the lease of Pinford End Farm, there was a
penalty of £10 an acre for breaking up pasture; a great increase in
the amount of the penalty. All compost, dung, soil, and ashes arising
on the farm were to be bestowed upon it.
Only two crops successively were to be taken on any of the arable
land, but land sown with clover and rye-grass, if fed off, or with
turnips which were fed on some part of the farm, were not to count as
crops.
The ashes mentioned were those from wood, which were now carefully
looked after, as it had become the custom to sell them to the
soap-boilers, who came round to every farm collecting them. This is
the earliest mention in a Hawsted lease of rye-grass, clover, and
turnips, though clover and turnips had been first cultivated there
about 1700, and soon spread.
The winter of 1708-9 was very severe, a great frost lasting from
October until the spring; wheat was 81s. 9d. a quarter, and high
prices lasted until 1715.[415]
From 1715 to 1765 was an era of good seasons and low prices generally;
in that half-century Tooke says there were only five bad seasons. In
1732 prices of corn were very low, wheat being about 24s. a quarter,
so that we are not surprised to find that its cultivation often did
not pay at all.[416]
At Little Gadsden in Hertfordshire, in that year a fair season, and on
enclosed land, the following is the balance sheet for an acre:
DR. £ s. d.
Rent 12 0
Dressing (manuring) 1 0 0
2-1/2 bushels of seed 7 6
Ploughing first time 6 0
" twice more 8 0
Harrowing 6
Reaping and carrying 6 6
Threshing 3 9
--------
3 4 3
========
CR. £ s. d.
15 bushels of wheat (a poor crop, as
20 bushels was now about the average) 2 2 0
Straw 11 6
2 13 6
--------
_LOSS_ 10 9
========
On barley, worth about £1 a quarter, the loss was 3s. 6d. an acre; on
oats, worth 13s. a quarter, however, the profit was 21s.; on beans,
26s. 6d., these being that year exceptionally good and worth 20s. a
quarter.[417] Ellis objected to the new mode of drilling wheat
because, he said, the rows are more exposed to the violence of the
winds, rains, &c., by growing apart, than if close together, when the
stalks support each other.[418] This estimate may be compared to that
of Tull for the 'old way' of sowing wheat,[419] and to the following
estimate of fifty years later in Surrey, when wheat was a much better
price:--
DR. £ s. d.
Rent, tithe, taxes 1 0 0
Team, &c. 1 0 0
2 bushels of seed 10 0
Carting and spreading manure and water furrowing 2 6
Brining 6
Weeding 1 6
Reaping and carrying 9 0
Threshing and cleaning 7 6
Binding straw 1 6
---------
£3 12 6[420]
=========
CR.
20 bushels at 5s. 5 0 0
1-1/2 loads of straw 1 2 6
---------
£6 2 6
=========
The profit was thus £2 10s. 0d. an acre, and for barley it was £3 3s.
6d., for oats £1 19s. 10d., for beans £1 13s. 0d.[421]
This crop of wheat was not very good, as the average in that district
was from 20 to 25 bushels per acre, and Young before this saw crops of
30 bushels per acre growing. The over frequent use of fallows, which
had so long marked agriculture, was in the early half of the
eighteenth century beginning to be strongly disapproved of. Bradley
advocated the continuous cultivation of the ground with different
kinds of crops, 'for I find', he said, 'by experience that if such
crops are sown as are full of fibrous roots, such roots greatly help
to open the parts of grounds inclining to too much stiffness.'[422]
FOOTNOTES:
[367] _Six Centuries of Work and Wages_, p. 472.
[368] See Baker, _Record of Seasons and Prices_, p. 185.
[369] Eden, _State of the Poor_, iii p. cvii; Thorold Rogers, _Work
and Wages_, p. 396.
[370] In Herefordshire at this time it was 1-1/2d. per lb.
[371] Hasbach, _op. cit._ p. 86.
[372] Eden, _op. cit._ i. 286.
[373] Ibid. i. 498.
[374] Hasbach, _op. cit._ p. 71.
[375] Smith, _Memoirs of Wool_, ii. 93.
[376] John Lawrence, _New System of Agriculture_, p. 45. In 1712, a
normal season, 48 acres of wheat at Southwick in Hants produced 16
bushels per acre, 45 acres of barley 12 bushels per acre, 30 acres of
oats 24 bushels per acre; at the same place 240 sheep realized 8s.
each, cows 65s., calves £1, horses £6, hay 25s. a ton (_Hampshire
Notes and Queries_, iii. 120).
[377] Worlidge, _Systema Agriculturae_, p. 42.
[378] _Collections_, iv. 142.
[379] Lawrence, _New System of Agriculture_, p. 109.
[380] _Tour_ (ed. 1724), i. 87.
[381] Ellis, _Chiltern and Vale Farming_, p. 353.
[382] Bradley, _General Treatise_, i. 175.
[383] Ellis, _Chiltern and Vale Farming_, p. 260.
[384] J. Lawrence, _New System of Agriculture_, p. 112.
[385] Ibid. p. 92. About 1757 Lucerne, hitherto little grown in
England, took its place in the rotation of crops.
[386] Ibid. p. 130.
[387] _A General Treatise on Husbandry_ (1726), i. 72; cf. c.
[388] The black cattle seem to have been spread very generally over
England, according to previous writers and to Defoe, who often
mentions them. He saw a 'prodigious quantity' in the meadows by the
Waveney in Norfolk.--_Tour_, i. 97.
[389] Bradley, _General Treatise_, i. 76.
[390] Slater, _English Peasantry_, p. 52.
[391] _Tour_ (ed. 1724), i. (1) 97, and iii. (2) 73.
[392] Ibid. i. 63.
[393] J. Lawrence, _New System of Agriculture_, p. 151.
[394] Bradley, _General Treatise_, i. 110.
[395] _Country Gentleman and Farmer's Director_ (1726), p. 7.
[396] Defoe, _Tour_, i. 87.
[397] Defoe, _Tour_ (3rd ed.), i. 81.
[398] Defoe, _Tour_ (ed. 1724), ii. 1, 134.
[399] Bradley, _General Treatise_, i. 160; see also Smith, _Memoirs of
Wool_, ii. 169, where the sheep of Leominster, of Cotteswold, and of
the Isle of Wight are said to be the best in 1719. The great market
for sheep was Weyhill Fair, and Stourbridge Fair was a great wool
market.
[400] _The West Country Farmer, a Representation of the Decay of
Trade_, 1737.
[401] _Memoirs of Wool_, ii. 243.
[402] Ibid. ii. 399.
[403] _Farmer's Letters_ (3rd ed.), p. 27.
[404] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, ii. 384.
[405] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, ii. 458.
[406] Ormerod, _Cheshire_, i. 129. These words were written about
1656.
[407] See _Victoria County History: Rutland, Agriculture_. Stilton was
eaten in the same condition as many prefer it now, 'with the mites
round it so thick that they bring a spoon for you to eat them.'
[408] Defoe, _Tour_, i. (1) 78. Cheshire cheese was 2d. to 2-1/2d. per
lb., Cheddar 6d. to 8d. in 1724, an extraordinary difference.
[409] Bradley, i. 172.
[410] Preface to _Horse-hoeing Husbandry_, (ed. 1733).
[411] _Horse-hoeing Husbandry_, p. vi.
[412] _The West Country Farmer_, above quoted, says wheat growing (in
1737) paid little. Before a bushel can be sold it costs £4 an acre,
and the crop probably fetches half the money.
[413] _R.A.S.E. Journ._ (3rd Ser.), ii. 20.
[414] Cullum, _Hawsted_, p. 216.
[415] Tooke, _History of Prices_, i. 35.
[416] Wheat averaged:
1718-22 about 27s. 1730 about 30s. 1750 about 30s. 1724 " 36s. 1732 "
24s. 1755 " 35s. 1725 " 46s. 1736 " 30s. 1760 " 38s. 1726 " 35s. 1740
" 42s. 1765 " 42s. 1728 " 52s. 1744 " 23s.
[417] Ellis, _Chiltern and Vale Farming_, p. 209. Nothing is charged
for tithe and taxes.
[418] Ibid. p. 352.
[419] See above, p. 177, also p. 199 for Young's estimate in 1770.
[420] Nothing is charged for the manure which was carted and spread.
[421] John Trusler, _Practical Husbandry_, p. 28.
[422] _Country Gentleman and Farmer's Director_ (1726), p. xiii.
CHAPTER XV
1700-1765
TOWNSHEND.--SHEEP-ROT.--CATTLE PLAGUE. FRUIT-GROWING
In 1730 Charles, second Viscount Townshend, retired from politics, on
his quarrel with his brother-in-law Walpole, who remarked that 'as
long as the firm was Townshend and Walpole the utmost harmony
prevailed, but it no sooner became Walpole and Townshend than things
went wrong'. He devoted himself to the management of his Norfolk
estates and set an example to English landlords in wisely and
diligently experimenting in farm practice which was soon followed on
all sides, the names of Lords Ducie, Peterborough, and Bolingbroke
being the best known of his fellow-labourers. A generation afterwards
Young wrote, 'half the County of Norfolk within the memory of man
yielded nothing but sheep feed, whereas those very tracts of land are
now covered with as fine barley and rye as any in the world and great
quantities of wheat besides.'[423] There can be no doubt from this
statement, made by an eyewitness of exceptional capacity, that he
commenced the work so nobly carried on by Coke. The same authority
tells us that when Townshend began his improvements near Norwich much
of the land was an extensive heath without either tree or shrub, only
a sheepwalk to another farm; so many carriages crossed it that they
would sometimes be a mile abreast of each other in pursuit of the best
track. By 1760 there was an excellent turnpike road, enclosed on each
side with a good quickset hedge, and all the land let out in
enclosures and cultivated on the Norfolk system in superior style; the
whole being let at 15s. an acre, or ten times its original value.
Townshend's two special hobbies were the field cultivation of turnips,
and improvement in the rotation of crops. Pope says his conversation
was largely of turnips, and he was so zealous in advocating them that
he was nicknamed 'Turnip Townsend'.[424] He initiated the Norfolk or
four-course system of cropping, in which roots, grasses, and cereals
were wisely blended, viz. turnips, barley, clover and rye grass,
wheat. He also reintroduced marling to the light lands of Norfolk, and
followed Tull's system of drilling and horse-hoeing turnips, with the
result that the poor land of which his estate was largely composed was
converted into good corn and cattle-growing farms. Like all the
progressive agriculturists of the day, he was an advocate of
enclosures, and he had no small share in the growth of the movement by
which, in the reigns of Anne and the first two Georges, 244 enclosure
Acts were passed and 338,177 acres enclosed. The progress of enclosure
was alleged as a proof that England was never more prosperous than
under Walpole; the number of private gentlemen in Britain of ample
estates was said to exceed that of any country in the world
proportionately, and was far greater than in the reign of Charles II.
The value of land at twenty-six or twenty-seven years' purchase was a
conclusive proof of the wealth of England.[425]
Though, however, the first half of the century was generally
prosperous there were bad times for farmer and landlord. We have seen
that wheat-growing paid little, although from 1689 to 1773 the farmer
was protected against imports and aided by a bounty on exports. In
1738 Lord Lyttelton wrote: 'In most parts of England, gentlemen's
rents are so ill paid and the weight of taxes lies so heavy upon them
that those who have nothing from the Court can scarce support their
families.'[426] Sheep in the damp climate of England have always been
subject to rot, and in 1735 there was, according to Ellis, the most
general rot in the memory of man owing to a very wet season; and, as
in the disastrous year of 1879, which must be fresh in many farmers'
memories, other animals, deer, hares, and rabbits, were affected also;
and the dead bodies of rotten sheep were so numerous in road and field
that the stench was offensive to every one. Another bad outbreak
occurred in 1747. It is well known that farmers are always grumblers,
probably with an eye to the rent; but even in these much praised times
they apparently made small profits. The west country farmer quoted
before, who had been fifty years on the same estate, and writes with
the stamp of sincerity, admits in 1737 that 'with all the skill and
diligence in the world he can hardly keep the cart upon the wheels.
Wool had gone down, wheat didn't pay and graziers were doing badly;
tho' formerly our cattle and wool was always a sure card'. He says
that the profits of grazing were reckoned at one-third of the
improvement that ensued from the grazing, but the grazier was not now
getting this. He attributed much of the distress, however, to the
extravagance of the times. Landlords, including his own, preferred
London to the country, and spent their money there. How different was
the behaviour of his landlord's grandfather. 'Many a time would his
worship send for me to go a-hunting or shooting with him; often would
he take me with him on his visits and would introduce me as his
friend. The country gentlewoman and the parson's wife, that used to
stitch for themselves, are now so hurried with dressings and visits
and other attractions that they hire an Abigail to do it.'
He thought, too, the labourers were getting too high wages; 'they are
so puffed up by our provender as to offer us their heels and threaten
on any occasion to leave us to do our work ourselves.' One would like
to hear the labourers' opinion on this point, but they were dumb. In
spite of higher wages the young men and young women flocked to the
cities, and those who remain were lazy and extravagant, even the
country wenches contending about 'double caps, huge petticoats, clock
stockings, and other trumpery'.[427]
The bounty now paid on the export of wheat was naturally resented by
the common people, as it raised the price of their bread. In 1737 a
load belonging to Farmer Waters of Burford, travelling along the road
to Redbridge for exportation, was stopped near White parish by a crowd
of people who knocked down the leading horse, broke the wagon in
pieces, cut the sacks, and strewed about the corn, with threats that
they would do the like to all who sold wheat to export.[428] While
England was paying farmers to export wheat she was also importing,
though in plentiful years importers had a very bad time. In 1730 there
were lying at Liverpool 33,000 windles (a windle--220 lb.) of imported
corn, unsaleable owing to the great crop in England.[429] The year
1740 was distinguished by one of the severest winters on record. From
January 1 to February 5 the thermometer seldom reached 32°, and the
cold was so intense that hens and ducks, even cattle in their stalls
died of it, trees were split asunder, crows and other birds fell to
the ground frozen in their flight. This extraordinary winter was
followed by a cold and late spring; no verdure had appeared by May; in
July it was still cold, and thousands of acres of turnips rotted in
the ground. Among minor misfortunes may be noticed the swarms of
grasshoppers who devastated the pastures near Bristol at the end of
August 1742,[430] and the swarms of locusts who came to England in
1748 and consumed the vegetables.[431]
The cattle plague of 1745[432] was so severe that owing to the
scarcity of stock great quantities of grass land were ploughed up,
which helped to account for the fact that in 1750 the export of corn
from England reached its maximum; though the main cause of this was
the long series of excellent seasons that set in after 1740.[433] The
cattle plague also raged in 1754 in spite of an Order in Council that
all infected cattle should be shot and buried 4 ft. deep, and pitch,
tar, rosin, and gunpowder burnt where infected cattle had died, and
cow-houses washed with vinegar and water. Such were the sanitary
precautions of the time.[434] In 1756 came another bad year, corn was
so scarce that there were many riots; the king expressed to Parliament
his concern at the suffering of the poor, and the export of corn was
temporarily prohibited. The fluctuations in price are remarkable: in
1756, before the deficiency of the harvest was realized, wheat was
22s. and it went up at the following rate: Jan., 1757, 49s.; Feb.,
51s.; March, 54s.; April, 64s.; June, 72s.
About the middle of the century, if we may judge from the _Compleat
Cyderman_ written in 1754 by experienced hands living in Devon,
Cornwall, Herefordshire, and elsewhere, fruit-growing received an
amount of attention which diminished greatly in after years. The
authors fully realized that an orchard under tillage causes apple
trees to grow as fast again as under grass, and this was well
understood and practised in Kent, where crops of corn were grown
between the trees.
A Devonshire 'cyderist' urged that orchards should be well sheltered
from the east winds, which 'bring over the narrow sea swarms of
imperceptible eggs, or insects in the air, from the vast tracts of
Tartarian and other lands, from which proceeded infinite numbers of
lice, flies, bugs, caterpillars, cobwebs, &c.' The best protection
was a screen of trees, and the best tree for the purpose, a perry pear
tree. In the hard frosts of 1709, 1716, and 1740 great numbers of
fruit and other trees had been destroyed. In Devon what was called the
'Southams method' was used for top-dressing the roots of old apple
trees, which was done in November with soil from the roads and
ditches, or lime or chalk, laid on furze sometimes, 6 inches thick,
for 4 or 5 ft. all round the trees. Great attention was paid there to
keeping the heads of fruit trees in good order, so that branches did
not interfere with each other,[435] and the heads were made to spread
as much as possible. Many of the trees were grown with the first
branches commencing 4 ft. 6 in. from the ground. It was claimed that
Devon excelled all other parts of England in the management of fruit
trees, a reputation that was not maintained, according to the works of
half a century later. The best cider apple In the county then was the
White-sour, white in colour, of a middling size, and early ripe; other
good ones were the 'Deux-Anns, Jersey, French Longtail, Royal Wilding,
Culvering, Russet, Holland Pippin, and Cowley Crab.' In Herefordshire
it was the custom to open the earth about the roots of the apple trees
and lay them bare and exposed for the 'twelve days of the Christmas
holidays', that the wind might loosen them. Then they were covered
with a compost of dung, mould, and a little lime. 'The best way' to
plant was to take off the turf and lay it by itself, then the next
earth or virgin mould, to be laid also by itself. Next put horse
litter over the bottom of the hole with some of the virgin mould on
that, on which place the tree, scattering some more virgin mould over
the roots, then spread some old horse-dung over this and upon that the
turf, leaving it in a basin shape. The ground between the trees in
Devonshire in young orchards was first planted with cabbage plants,
next year with potatoes, next with beans, and so on until the heads of
the trees became large enough, when the land was allowed to return to
pasture, a proceeding which was quite contrary to their previously
quoted assertion that tillage was best for fruit trees. The
cider-makers were quite convinced, as many are to-day, that rotten
apples were invaluable for cider, and the lady who was famous for the
best cider in the county never allowed one to be thrown away. A
generation later than this Marshall[436] noted that in Herefordshire
the management of orchards and their produce was far from being well
understood, though 'it has ever borne the name of the first cider
county'. All the old fruits were lost or declining in quality, the
famous Red Streak Apple was given up and the Squash Pear no longer
made to flourish.
As for prices, in 1707 apples were selling at Liverpool for 2s. 6d. a
bushel,[437] a very good price if we allow for the difference in the
value of money, but prices then were entirely dependent on the English
seasons; no foreign apples were imported, and a night's frost would
treble prices in a day. In 1742 at Aspall Hall, Suffolk, apples,
apparently for cider, were 10d. a bushel, in 1745 1s. a bushel, in
1746 only 4d., and in 1747 cider there was worth 6d. a gallon.[438] At
the end of the century, in 'the great hit' of 1784, common apples were
less than 6d. a bushel, the best about 2s. in 1786 the price was twice
as high, owing to a short crop. Incidentally there is mentioned in the
_Compleat Cyderman_ a novel implement, 'a most profitable new invented
five-hoe plough, that after the ground has been once ploughed with a
common plough will plough four or five acres in one day with only four
horses, and by a little alteration is fitted to hoe turnips or rape
crops as it is now practised by the ordinary farmers'; much too
favourable an estimate of the ordinary farmer, as Young found
horse-hoeing rare.
An acre of good orchard land at this time was let at £2 an acre; and
this is a fair balance sheet for an acre[439]:--
DR. £ s. d.
Rent of one acre 2 0 0
Tithe on 10 hogsheads, @ 6d. 5 0
Gathering, making, and carriage to and
from the pound, @ 3s. 6d. a hogshead 1 15 0
Racking twice, @ 6d. 5 0
Casks and cooperage 8 0
---------
£4 13 0
=========
CR. £ s. d.
10 hogsheads diminished by racking
and waste to 8, @ 12s. 6d. 5 0 0
========
Leaving a balance of 7s. for spoiling, &c., so there was not much
profit in cider-making then. The same authority sets down the cost of
planting an acre of apples as:--
£ s. d.
132 trees, @ 2s. 13 4 0
(The custom had been to plant 160 trees to
the acre, but this was considered too close.)
Carriage per tree, @ 2d.; manure per tree, @ 3d.;
planting per tree, @ 3d. 4 8 0
Interest on £17 12s. 0d. for fifteen years before
orchard is profitable, @ 5 per cent. 13 2 6
Loss of half the rent of the land for
the same period, @ 10s. an acre 7 10 0
Building cellarage for product per acre 5 0 0
---------
£43 4 6
=========
For this outlay the landowner would gain an additional rent of £1 a
year, so that, according to this authority, growing cider fruit at
that time paid neither landlord nor tenant.
FOOTNOTES:
[423] _Farmer's Letters_, i. 10.
[424] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (3rd Series), iii. 1.
[425] See the _Hyp Doctor_, No. 49.
[426] Tooke, _History of Prices_, i. 42.
[427] Cf. this and Tull's character of servants with Defoe's
accusation of their laziness.
[428] Salisbury newspaper, quoted by Baker, _Seasons and Prices_, p.
187.
[429] See _Autobiography of Wm. Stout_, ed. by J. Harland.
[430] _Gentleman's Magazine_, 1742.
[431] Baker, _op. cit._ p. 194.
[432] _A Defence of the Farmers of Great Britain_ (1814), p. 30.
[433] Tooke, _History of Prices_, i. 42.
[434] See a curious pamphlet called _An Exhortation to all People to
Consider the Afflicting Hand of God_ (1754), p. 6. The plague lasted
from 1745 to 1756.
[435] _The Compleat Cyderman_, p. 46.
[436] _Rural Economy of Gloucestershire_ (1788), ii. 206.
[437] Blundell's _Diary_, p. 55.
[438] MS. accounts of Mr. Chevallier, of Aspall Hall.
[439] _The Case with the County of Devon with respect to the New
Excise Duty on Cider_ (1763). The duty was 4s. a hogshead, but the
opposition was so strong it was taken off.
CHAPTER XVI
1765-1793
ARTHUR YOUNG.--CROPS AND THEIR COST.--THE LABOURERS' WAGES AND DIET.--THE
PROSPERITY OF FARMERS.--THE COUNTRY SQUIRE.--ELKINGTON.--BAKEWELL.--THE
ROADS.--COKE OF HOLKHAM.
The history of English agriculture in the latter half of the
eighteenth century has been so well described by Arthur Young that any
account of it at that time must largely be an epitome of his writings.
The greatest of English writers on agriculture was born in 1741, and
began farming early; but, as he confesses himself, was a complete
failure. When he was twenty-six he took a farm of 300 acres at Samford
Hall in Essex, and after five years of it paid a farmer £100 to take
it off his hands, who thereupon made a fortune out of it. He had
already begun writing on agriculture, and it must be confessed that he
began to advise people concerning the art of agriculture on a very
limited experience. It paid him, however, much better than farming,
for between 1766 and 1775 he realized £3,000 on his works, among which
were _The Farmer's Letters_, _The Southern_, _Northern_, and _Eastern
Tours_. These are his qualifications for writing on agriculture, from
his own pen: 'I have been a farmer these many years' (he was not yet
thirty), 'and that not in a single field or two but upon a tract of
near 300 acres most part of the time. I have cultivated on various
soils most of the vegetables common in England and many never
introduced into field husbandry. I have always kept a minute register
of my business in every detail of culture, expenses, and produce, and
an accurate comparison of the old and new husbandry.'[440] It is said
that though he really understood the theory and practice of farming he
failed utterly in small economies. He was also far too vivacious and
fond of society for the monotonous work of the plain farmer. At the
same time his failures gave his observant mind a clear insight into
the principles of agriculture. He was indefatigable in inquiries,
researches, and experiments; and the best proof of the value of his
works is that they were translated into Russian, German, and French.
He tells us in the preface to _Rural Economy_ that his constant
employment for the previous seven years, 'when out of my fields, has
been registering experiments.' His pet aversions were absentee
landlords, obsolete methods of cultivation, wastes and commons, and
small holdings (though towards the end of his life he changed his
opinion as to the last); and the following, according to him, were the
especially needed improvements of the time:--
The knowledge of good rotations of crops so as to do away with
fallows, which was to be effected by the general use of turnips,
beans, peas, tares, clover, &c., as preparation for white corn;
covered drains; marling, chalking, and claying; irrigation of meadows;
cultivation of carrots, cabbages, potatoes, sainfoin, and lucerne;
ploughing, &c., with as few cattle as possible; the use of harness for
oxen; cultivation of madden liquorice, hemp, and flax where
suitable.[441] Above all, the cultivation of waste lands, which he was
to live to see so largely effected.
There was little knowledge of the various sorts of grasses at this
time, and to Young is due the credit of introducing the cocksfoot, and
crested dog's tail.
In 1790 he contemplated retiring to France or America, so heavy was
taxation in England. 'Men of large fortune and the poor', he said, in
words which many to-day will heartily endorse, 'have reason to think
the government of this country the first in the world; the middle
classes bear the brunt.' Perhaps to-day 'men of large fortune' have
altered their opinion and only 'the poor' are satisfied. However, he
only visited France, and gave us his vivid picture of that country
before the great revolution.
In 1793 the Board of Agriculture was formed, and Young was made
secretary with a salary of £400 a year.
About 1810 he wrote that the preceding half-century had been by far
the most interesting in the progress of agriculture, and ascribes the
increase of interest in it to the publication of his _Tours_. George
III told him he always took with him the _Farmer's Letters_. The
improvement, Young said, had been largely due to individual effort,
for commerce had been predominant in Parliament and agriculture had
begun to be neglected; a statement which, seeing that Parliament was
then almost entirely composed of landowners, must be accepted with
some reserve.
Young died in 1820, having been totally blind for some time, a
misfortune which did not prevent him working hard. In his well-known
_Tours_ he often had much difficulty in obtaining information, and
confesses that he was forced to make more than one farmer drunk before
he got anything out of him.
The exodus from the country to the towns then, as so often in history,
was noted by thinking people, but Young says it was merely a natural
consequence of the demand for profitable employment and was not to be
regretted; but he wrote in a time when the country population was
still numerous, and there was little danger of England becoming, what
she is to-day, a country without a solid foundation, with no reservoir
of good country blood to supply the waste of the towns.
When Young began to write, the example of Townshend and his
contemporaries was being followed on all sides, and this good movement
was stimulated by Young's writings. Farming was the reigning taste of
the day. There was scarce a nobleman without his farm, most of the
country gentlemen were farmers, and attended closely to their business
instead of leaving it to stewards, 'who governed in matters of wheat
and barley as absolutely as in covenants of leases,' and the squire
delighted in setting the country a staring at the novelties he
introduced. Even the stable and the kennel were ousted by farming from
rural talk,[442] and citizens who breathed the smoke of London five
days a week were farmers the other two, and many young fellows of
small fortune who had been brought up in the country took farms, and
the fashion was followed by doctors, lawyers, clergymen, soldiers,
sailors, and merchants. The American and French War of 1775-83 and the
great conflict with France from 1793 to 1815 were, however, to divert
many of the upper classes from agriculture, for they very properly
thought their duty was then to fight for their country; so that we
again have numerous complaints of agents and stewards managing estates
who knew nothing whatever about their business. It was not to be
wondered at that all this activity brought about considerable
progress. 'There have been,' said Young about 1770, 'more experiments,
more discoveries, and more general good sense displayed within these
ten years than in a hundred preceding ones,' a statement which perhaps
did not attach sufficient importance to the work of Townshend and his
contemporaries, and to the 'new husbandry' of Tull, which Young did
not appreciate at its full value.[443]
The place subsequently taken by the Board of Agriculture, and in our
time by the Royal Agricultural Society, was then occupied by the
Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce,
which offered premiums for such objects as the cultivation of carrots
in the field for stock, then little practised; for gathering the
different sorts of grass seeds and keeping them clean and free from
all mixture with other grasses, a very rare thing at that time; for
experiments in the comparative merits of the old and new husbandry;
for the growth of madder; £20 for a turnip-slicing machine, then
apparently unknown, and for experiments whether rolling or harrowing
grass land was better, 'at present one of the most disputed points of
husbandry.'
In spite of this progress, many crops introduced years before were
unknown to many farmers. Sainfoin, cabbages, potatoes, carrots, were
not common crops in every part of England, though every one of them
was well known in some part or other; not more than half, or at most
two-thirds, of the nation cultivated clover. Many, however, of the
nobility and gentry in the north had grown cabbages with amazing
success, lately, 30 guineas an acre being sometimes the value of the
crop.
Half the cultivated lands, in spite of the progress of enclosure for
centuries, were still farmed on the old common-field system. When
anything out of the common was to be done on common farms, all common
work came to a standstill. 'To carry out corn stops the ploughs,
perhaps at a critical season; the fallows are frequently seen overrun
with weeds because it is seed time; in a word, some business is ever
neglected.'[444] As for the outcry against enclosing commons and
wastes, people forgot that the farmers as well as the poor had a right
of common and took special care by their large number of stock to
starve every animal the poor put on the common.[445]
About the same time that Young wrote these words there appeared a
pamphlet written by 'A Country Gentleman' on the advantages and
disadvantages of enclosing waste lands and common fields, which puts
the arguments against enclosure very forcibly.[446] The writer's
opinion was that it was clearly to the landowner's gain to promote
enclosures, but that the impropriator of tithes reaped most benefit
and the small freeholder least, because his expenses increased
inversely to the smallness of his allotment. As to diminution of
employment, he reckoned that enclosed arable employed about ten
families per 1,000 acres, open field arable twenty families, a
statement opposed to the opinion of nearly all the agricultural
writers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. It is surely an
incontestable fact that enclosed land meant much better tillage, and
better tillage meant more labour, the excessive amount of fallow
necessary under the common-field system, from the inability to grow
roots except by special arrangement, is alone enough to prove this.
The same writer admitted that common pastures, wastes, &c., employed
only one family per 2,000 acres, but enclosed pasture five families
per 1,000 acres, and enclosed wastes sixteen families.
A 'Country Farmer', who wrote in 1786, states that many of the small
farmers displaced by enclosures sold their few possessions and
emigrated to America.[447] The growing manufacturing towns also
absorbed a considerable number. That there was a considerable amount
of hardship inflicted on small holders and commoners is certain, but
industrial progress is frequently attended by the dislocation of
industry and consequent distress; the introduction of machinery, for
instance, often causing great suffering to hand-workers, but
eventually benefiting the whole community. How many men has the
self-binding reaping machine thrown for a time out of work? So
enclosure caused distress to many individuals, but was for the good of
the whole nation. The history of enclosure is really the history of
progress in farming; the conversion of land badly tilled in the old
common fields, and of waste land little more valuable than the
prairies; into well-managed fruitful farms. That much of the
common-field land when enclosed was laid down to grass is certainly
true, and certainly inevitable if it paid best under grass.[448] No
one can expect the holders of land naturally best suited for grass to
keep it under tillage for philanthropic purposes. A vast number of the
commoners too were idle thriftless beings, whose rights on a few acres
enabled them to live a life of pilfering and poaching; and it was a
very good thing when such people were induced to lead a more regular
and respectable existence. The great blot on the process was that it
made the English labourer a landless man. Compensation was given him
at the time of enclosure in the shape of allotments or sums of money,
but the former he was generally compelled to give up owing to the
expense he had been put to at allotment, and the latter he often spent
in the public-house.
At this date the proprietors of large estates who wished to enclose by
Act of Parliament, generally settled all the particulars among
themselves before calling any meeting of the rest of the proprietors.
The small proprietor had very little say either in regulating the
clauses of the Act, or in the choice of commissioners. Any owner of
one-fifth of the land, however, could negative the measure and often
used his right to impose unreasonable clauses. It is well known that
the legal expenses and fencing were very costly. The enclosure
commissioners too often divided the land in an arbitrary and ignorant
manner, and there was no appeal from them except by filing a bill in
Chancery. Accounts were hardly ever shown by the commissioners, and if
a proprietor refused to pay the sums levied they were empowered to
distrain immediately. All these evils attending enclosure made many
who were eager to benefit by it very chary in commencing it.[449]
Then, as now, one of the commonest errors of farmers was that of
taking too much land for their capital; Young considered £6 an acre
necessary on an average, equal to more than £12 to-day; a sum which
few farmers at any time have in hand when they take a farm. As for
gentlemen farmers, who were then rushing into the business, they were
warned that they had no chance of success if they kept any company or
amused themselves with anything but their own business, unless perhaps
they had a good bailiff.
Lime, one of the most ancient of manures, was then the most commonly
used in England, 80 to 100 loads an acre being a common dressing, but
many farmers were very ignorant of its proper use. Marl, which to-day
is seldom used, was considered to last for twenty years, though for
the first year no benefit was observable, and very little the second
and the third, its value then becoming very apparent. In the last five
years, however, its value was nearly worn out. But it was much to be
questioned whether marl in its best state anywhere yields an increase
of produce equal to that which a good manuring of dung will give.[450]
Marl was applied in huge quantities on arable and grass, and often
made the latter look like arable land so thickly was it spread.
At this date (1770) the average crops on poor, and on good land were[451]:
On land worth 5s. an acre:
Wheat 12 bushels per acre.
Rye 16 " "
Barley 16 " "
Oats 20 " "
Turnips, to the value of £1.
Clover " "
On land worth 20s. an acre:
Wheat 28 bushels per acre.
Barley 40 " "
Oats 48 " "
Beans 40 " "
Turnips, to the value of £3.
Clover " "
The cost of cultivating the latter, which may be given in full, as it
affords an excellent example of the price of growing various crops,
and the methods of their cultivation at this period, was as follows:
First year, turnips: £ s. d.
Rent 1 0 0
Tithe and 'town charges' 8 0
Five ploughings, @ 4s. 1 0 0
Three harrowings 1 0
Seed 6
Sowing 3
Twice hand-hoeing 7 0
-----------
£2 16 9
===========
It will be noticed there was no horse-hoeing.
Second year, barley: £ s. d.
Rent, tithe, &c. 1 8 0
Three ploughings 12 0
Three harrowings 1 0
Seed 8 0
Sowing 3
Mowing and harvesting 3 0
Water furrowing 6
Threshing, @ 1s. a quarter 5 0
-----------
£2 17 9
===========
Third year, clover: £ s. d.
Rent, &c. 1 8 0
Seed 5 0
Sowing 3
----------
£1 13 3
==========
Fourth year,[452] wheat: £ s. d.
Rent, &c. 1 8 0
One ploughing 4 0
Three harrowings 1 0
Seed 10 0
Sowing 3
Water furrowing 9
Thistling 1 6
Reaping and harvesting 7 0
Threshing, @ 2s. a quarter 7 0
----------
£2 19 6
==========
Fifth year, beans: £ s. d.
Rent, &c. 1 8 0
Two ploughings 8 0
Seed, 2 bushels 8 0
Sowing 6
Twice hand-hoeing 12 0
Twice horse-hoeing 3 0
Reaping and harvesting 8 0
Threshing 5 0
----------
£3 12 6
==========
Sixth year, oats: £ s. d.
Rent, &c. 1 8 0
Once ploughing 4 0
Two harrowings 8
Four bushels of seed 6 0
Sowing 3
Threshing, @ 1s. a quarter 6 0
----------
£2 7 11
==========
Good land at a high rent is always better than poor land at a low
rent; the average profit per acre on 5s. land was then about 8s. 8d.,
on 20s. land, 29s.
Grass was much more profitable than tillage, the profit on 20 acres of
arable in nine years amounted to £88, whereas on grass it was £212, or
9s. 9d. an acre per annum for the former and 23s. for the latter.[453]
Yet dairying, at all events, was then on the whole badly managed and
unprofitable. The average cow ate 2-1/2 acres of grass, and the rent
of this with labour and other expenses made the cost £5 a year per
cow, and its average produce was not worth more than £5 6s. 3d.[454]
This scanty profit was due to the fact that few farmers used roots,
cabbages, &c., for their cows, and to their wrong management of pigs,
kept on the surplus dairy food. By good management the nett return
could be made as much as £4 15s. 0d. per cow.
The management of sheep in the north of England was wretched. In
Northumberland the profit was reckoned at 1s. a head, partly derived
from cheese made from ewes' milk. The fleeces averaged 2 lb., and the
wool was so bad as not to be worth more than 3d. or 4d. per lb.[455]
Pigs could be made to pay well, as the following account testifies:
Food and produce of a sow in one year (1763), which produced seven
pigs in April and eleven in October:
DR. £ s. d.
Grains 10 4
Cutting a litter 1 6
5 quarters peas 5 2 0
10 bushels barley 1 0 0
Expenses in selling[456] 11 6
10 bushels peas 1 6 3
----------
£8 11 7
==========
CR. £ s. d.
A pig 2 3
A fat hog 1 9 0
Another, 110 lb. wt. 1 12 9
Another, 116 lb. wt. 2 0 0
Heads 5 3
3 fat hogs 6 7 0
1 fat hog 2 0 0
10 young pigs 4 16 6
-----------
£18 12 9
8 11 7
-----------
Profit £10 1 2
===========
We have seen that Young thought little of the 'new husbandry'; he does
not even give Tull the credit of inventing the drill: 'Mr. Tull
perhaps _again_ invented it. He practised it upon an extent of ground
far beyond that of any person preceding him: the spirit of drilling
died with Mr. Tull and was not revived till within a few years.'[457]
It was doubtful if 50 acres of corn were then annually drilled in
England. Lately drilling had been revived and there were keen disputes
as to the old and new methods of husbandry, the efficacy of the new
being far from decided. The cause of the slow adoption of drill
husbandry was the inferiority of the drills hitherto invented. They
were complex in construction, expensive, and hard to procure. It
seemed impossible to make a drill or drill plough as it was called,
for such it then was--a combination of drill, plough, and
harrow--capable of sowing at various depths and widths, and at the
same time light enough for ordinary use. All the drills hitherto made
were too light to stand the rough use of farm labourers: 'common
ploughs and harrows the fellows tumble about in so violent a manner
that if they were not strength itself they would drop to pieces. In
drawing such instruments into the field the men generally mount the
horses, and drag them after them; in passing gateways twenty to one
they draw them against the gate post.' Some of 'these fellows' are
still to be seen!
Another defect in drilling was that the drill plough filled up all the
water furrows, which, at a time when drainage was often neglected,
were deemed of especial importance, and they all had to be opened
again.
Further, said the advocates of the old husbandry, it was a question
whether all the horse-hoeings, hand-hoeings, and weedings of the new
husbandry, though undoubtedly beneficial, really paid. It was very
hard to get enough labourers for these operations. With more reason
they objected to the principles of discarding manure and sowing a
large number of white straw crops in succession, but admitted the new
system was admirably adapted for beans, turnips, cabbages, and
lucerne.
However, there were many followers of Tull. The Author of
_Dissertations on Rural Subjects_[458] thought the drill plough an
excellent invention, as it saved seed and facilitated hoeing; but he
said Tull's drill was defective in that the distances between the rows
could not be altered, a defect which the writer claims to have
remedied. Young's desire for a stronger drill seems to have been soon
answered, as the same writer says the barrel drill invented by
Du-Hamel and improved by Craik was strong, cheap, and easily managed.
The tendency of the latter half of the century was decidedly in favour
of larger farms; it was a bad thing for the small holders, but it was
an economic tendency which could not be resisted. The larger farmers
had more capital, were more able and ready to execute improvements;
they drained their land, others often did not; having sufficient
capital they were able both to buy and sell to the best advantage and
not sacrifice their produce at a low price to meet the rent, as the
small farmer so often did and does. They could pay better wages and so
get better men, kept more stock and better, and more efficient
implements. They also had a great advantage in being able by their
good teams to haul home plenty of purchased manure, which the small
farmer often could not do. The small tenants, who had no by-industry,
then, as now, had to work and live harder than the ordinary labourer
to pay their way.
Young calculated as early as 1768 that the average size of farms over
the greater part of England was slightly under 300 acres.[459] In his
_Tour in France_ Young, speaking of the smallness of French farms as
compared with English ones, and of the consequent great inferiority of
French farming, says, 'Where is the little farmer to be found who will
cover his whole farm with marl at the rate of 100 to 150 tons per
acre; who will drain his land at the expense of £2 to £3 an acre; who
will, to improve the breed of his sheep, give 1,000 guineas for the
use of a single ram for a single season; who will send across the
kingdom to distant provinces for new implements and for men to use
them? Deduct from agriculture all the practices that have made it
flourishing in this island, and you have precisely the management of
small farms.' In 1868 the _Report of the Commission on the Agriculture
of France_[460] agreed with Young, noting the grave consequences of
the excessive subdivision of land, loss of time, waste of labour,
difficulties in rotation of crops, and of liberty of cultivation.
For stocking an arable farm of 70 acres Young considered the following
expenditure necessary, the items of which give us interesting
information as to prices about 1770:--
£ s. d.
Rent, tithe, and town charges for first year 70 0 0
Household furniture 30 0 0
Wagon 25 0 0
Cart with ladders 12 0 0
Tumbril 10 0 0
Roller for broad lands (of wood) 2 0 0
" narrow " " 1 15 0
Cart harness for 4 horses 8 17 0
Plough " " 2 16 0
2 ploughs 3 0 0
A pair of harrows 1 15 0
Screen, bushel, fan, sieves, forks, rakes, &c. 8 0 0
Dairy furniture 3 0 0
20 sacks 2 10 0
4 horses 32 0 0
Wear and tear, and shoeing one year 13 0 0
Keep of 4 horses from Michaelmas to May Day, @
2s. 6d. each a week 14 0 0
5 cows 20 0 0
20 sheep 5 10 0
One sow 15 0
One servant's board and wages for one year 15 0 0
A labourer's wages for one year 20 0 0
Seed for first year, 42 acres, @ 11s. 6d. 24 3 0
Harvest labour 1 10 0
------------
£326 11 0
============
Or nearly £5 an acre.
About the same date the _Complete English Farmer_ reckoned that the
occupier of a farm of 500 acres (300 arable, 200 pasture), ought to
have a capital of £1,500, and estimated that, after paying expenses
and maintaining his family, he could put by £50 a year; 'but this
capital was much beyond what farmers in general can attain to.'[461]
The controversy of horses versus oxen for working purposes was still
raging, and Young favoured the use of oxen; for the food of horses
cost more, so did their harness and their shoeing, they are much more
liable to disease, and oxen when done with could be sold for beef. One
stout lad, moreover, could attend to 8 or 10 oxen, for all he had to
do was to put their fodder in the racks and clean the shed; no
rubbing, no currying or dressing being necessary. No beasts fattened
better than oxen that had been worked. A yoke of oxen would plough as
much as a pair of horses and carry a deeper and truer furrow, while
they were just as handy as horses in wagons, carts, rollers, &c.
William Marshall, the other great agricultural writer of the end of
the eighteenth century, agreed with Young, yet in spite of all these
advantages horses were continually supplanting oxen.
Among the improvements in agriculture was the introduction of
broad-wheeled wagons; narrow-wheeled ones were usual, and these on the
turnpikes were only allowed to be drawn by 4 horses so that the load
was small, but broad-wheeled wagons might use 8 horses. The cost of
the latter was £50 against £25 for the former.[462]
Young's opinion of the labouring man, like Tull's, was not a high one.
'I never yet knew', he says, 'one instance of any poor man's working
diligently while young and in health to escape coming to the parish
when ill or old.' This is doubtless too sweeping. There must have been
others like George Barwell, whom Marshall tells of in his _Rural
Economy of the Midlands_, who had brought up a family of five or six
sons and daughters on a wage of 5s. to 7s. a week, and after they were
out in the world saved enough to support him in his old age. The
majority, however, long before the crushing times of the French War,
seem to have been thoroughly demoralized by indiscriminate parish
relief, and habitually looked to the parish to maintain them in
sickness and old age. Cullum[463] a few years later, remarks on the
poor demanding assistance without the scruple and delicacy they used
to have, and says 'the present age seems to aim at abolishing all
subordination and dependence and reducing all ranks as near a level as
possible.'! Idleness, drunkenness, and what was then often looked on
with disgust and contempt, excessive tea-drinking, were rife. Tea then
was very expensive, 8s. or 10s. a lb. being an ordinary price, so that
the poor had to put up with a very much adulterated article, most
pernicious to health. The immoderate use of this was stated to have
worse effects than the immoderate use of spirits. The consumption of
it was largely caused by the deficiency of the milk supply, owing to
the decrease of small farms; the large farmers did not retail such
small commodities as milk and butter, but sent them to the towns so
that the poor often went without.[464]
In 1767 Young found wages differing according to the distance from
London[465]:--
s. d.
20 miles from London they were per week 10 9
From 20 to 60 " " " 7 8
" 60 to 110 " " " 6 4
" 110 to 170 " " " 6 3
Giving an average of 7s. 9d. which, however, was often exceeded as
there was much piece-work which enabled the men to earn more.
Young drew up a dietary for a labourer, his wife, and a family of
three children, which he declared to be sufficient:--
£ s. d.
Food, 6s. per week[466]; per year 15 12 0
Rent 1 10 0
Clothes 2 10 0
Soap and candles 1 5 0
Loss of time through illness, and medicine 1 0 0
Fuel 2 0 0
----------
£23 17 0
==========
£ s. d.
The man's wages were, @ 1s. 3d. a day, for the year 19 10 0
The woman's, @ 3-3/4d. a day, for the year 4 17 6
The boy of fifteen could earn 9 0 0
The boy of ten could earn 4 7 6
----------
£37 15 0
==========
Which would give the family a surplus of £13 18s. 0d. a year.
What the man's food should consist of is shown by a list of 'seven
days' messes for a stout man':--
s. d.
1st day. 2 lb. of bread made of wheat, rye, and
potatoes--'no bread exceeds it' 2
Cheese, 2 oz. @ 4d. a lb 1/2
Beer, 2 quarts 1
2nd day. Three messes of soup 2
3rd day. Rice pudding 2-1/2
4th day. 1/4 lb. of fat meat and potatoes baked together 2-3/4
Beer 1
5th day. Rice milk 2
6th day. Same as first day 3-1/2
7th day. Potatoes, fat meat, cheese, and beer 4
---------
1 9-1/4
=========
As Young was a man of large practical experience we may assume that
this, though it seems a very insufficient diet, was not unlike the
food of some labourers at that date. However, the bread he recommends
was not that eaten by a large number of them. Eden[467] states that in
1764 about half the people of England were estimated to be using
wheaten bread, and at the end of the century, although prices had
risen greatly, he says that in the Home Counties wheaten bread was
universal among the peasant class. Young, indeed, acknowledges that
many insisted on wheaten bread.[468] In Suffolk, according to
Cullum,[469] pork and bacon were the labourer's delicacies, bread and
cheese his ordinary diet.
The north of England was more thrifty than the south. At the end of
the eighteenth century barley and oaten bread were much used there.
Lancashire people fed largely on oat bread, leavened and unleavened;
the 33rd Regiment, which went by the name of the 'Havercake lads', was
usually recruited from the West Riding where oat bread was in common
use, and was famous for having fine men in its ranks.[470] The
labourers of the north were also noted for their skill in making soups
in which barley was an important ingredient. In many of the southern
counties tea was drunk at breakfast, dinner, and supper by the poor,
often without milk or sugar; but alcoholic liquors were also consumed
in great quantities, the southerner apparently always drinking a
considerable amount, the northerner at rare intervals drinking deep.
The drinking in cider counties seems always to have been worse as far
as quantity goes than elsewhere, and the drink bills on farms were
enormous. Marshall says that in Gloucestershire drinking a gallon
'bottle', generally a little wooden barrel, at a draught was no
uncommon feat; and in the Vale of Evesham a labourer who wanted to be
even with his master for short payment emptied a two-gallon bottle
without taking it from his lips. Even this feat was excelled by 'four
well-seasoned yeomen, who resolved to have a fresh hogshead tapped,
and setting foot to foot emptied it at one sitting.'[471] Yet in the
beer-drinking counties great quantities were consumed; a gallon a day
per man all the year round being no uncommon allowance.[472]
The superior thrift of the north was shown in clothes as well as food,
the midland and southern labourer at the end of the century buying all
his clothes, the northerner making them almost all at home; there were
many respectable families in the north who had never bought a pair of
stockings, coat, or waistcoat in their lives, and a purchased coat was
considered a mark of extravagance and pride.
Perhaps the most remarkable feature of Young's dietary is that green
vegetables are absolutely ignored. The peasant was supposed to need
them as little as in the Middle Ages.
However, Young admits that very few labourers lived as cheaply as
this, and he found the actual ordinary budget for the same family to
be:--
£ s. d.
Food, per week, 7s. 6d.; per year 19 10 0
Beer " 1s. 6d. " 3 18 0
Soap and candles 1 5 0
Rent 1 10 0
Clothes 2 10 0
Fuel 2 0 0
Illness, &c. 1 0 0
Infant 2 12 0
----------
£34 5 0
==========
This, with the same Income as before, left him with a surplus of £3
10s. 0d.; but as it was not likely his wife could work all the year
round, or that both his eldest children should be boys, it appears
that his expenses must often have exceeded his income. This being so,
it is not surprising that he was often drunken and reckless, and ready
to come on the parish for relief. To labour incessantly, often with
wife and boys, to live very poorly, yet not even make both ends meet,
was enough to kill all spirit in any one.
A great evil from which the labourer suffered was the restrictions
thrown on him of settling in another parish. If he desired to take his
labour to a better market he often found it closed to him. His
marriage was discouraged,[473] because a single man did not want a
cottage and a married one did. To ease the rates there was open war
against cottages, and many were pulled down.[474] If a labourer in a
parish to which he did not legally belong signified his intention of
marrying, he immediately had notice to quit the parish and retire to
his own, unless he could procure a certificate that neither he nor his
would be chargeable. If he went to his own parish he came off very
badly, for they didn't want him, and cottages being scarce he probably
had to put up with sharing one with one or more families. Sensible men
cried out for the total abolition of the poor laws, the worst effects
of which were still to be felt.
Yet there was a considerable migration of labour at harvest time when
additional hands were needed. Labourers came from neighbouring
counties, artisans left their workshops in the towns, Scots came to
the Northern counties, Welshmen to the western, and Irishmen appeared
in many parts; and they were as a rule supplied by a contractor.[475]
London was regarded as a source of great evil to the country by
attracting the young and energetic thither. It used, men said, to be
no such easy matter to get there when a stage coach was four or five
days creeping 100 miles and fares were high; but in 1770 a country
fellow 100 miles from London jumped on a coach in the morning and for
8s. or 10s. got to town by night, 'and ten times the boasts are
sounded in the ears of country fools by those who have seen London to
induce them to quit their healthy clean fields for a region of dirt,
stink, and noise.' A prejudice might well have been entertained
against the metropolis at this time, for it literally devoured the
people of England, the deaths exceeding the births by 8,000 a year.
One of the causes that had hitherto kept people from London was the
dread of the small-pox, but that was now said to be removed by
inoculation. Among the troubles farmers had to contend with were the
audacious depredations caused by poachers, generally labourers, who
swarmed in many villages. They took the farmer's horses out of his
fields after they had done a hard day's work and rode them all night
to drive the game into their nets, blundering over the hedges,
sometimes staking the horses, riding over standing corn, or anything
that was cover for partridges, and when they had sold their ill-gotten
game spent the money openly at the nearest alehouse. Then they would
go back and work for the farmers they had robbed, drunk, asleep, or
idle the whole day. The subscription packs of foxhounds were also a
great nuisance, many of the followers being townsmen who bored through
hedges and smashed the gates and stiles, conduct not unknown to-day.
In spite of these drawbacks the long period of great abundance from
1715 to 1765 and the consequent cheapness of food with an increase of
wages was attended with a great improvement in the condition and habits
of the people. Adam Smith refers to 'the peculiarly happy circumstances
of the country'; Hallam described the reign of George II as 'the most
prosperous period that England has ever experienced'[476]; and it was
Young's opinion about 1770 that England was in a most rich and
flourishing situation, 'her agriculture is upon the whole good and
spirited and every day improving, her industrious poor are well fed,
clothed, and lodged at reasonable rates, the prices of all necessaries
being moderate, our population increasing, the price of labour
generally high.'[477] The great degree of luxury to which the country
had arrived within a few years 'is not only astonishing but almost
dreadful to think of. Time was when those articles of indulgence which
now every mechanic aims at the possession of were enjoyed only by the
baron or lord.'[478] Great towns became the winter residence of those
who could not afford London, and the country was said to be everywhere
deserted, an evil largely attributed to the improvement of posting and
coaches. The true country gentleman was seldom to be found, the
luxuries of the age had softened down the hardy roughness of former
times and the 'country, like the capital, is one scene of dissipation.'
The private gentleman of £300 or £400 a year must have his horses,
dogs, carriages, pictures, and parties, and thus goes to ruin. The
articles of living, says the same writer, were 100 per cent. dearer
than some time back. This is a very different picture from that in
which Young represents every one rushing into farming, but no doubt
depicts one phase of national life.
An excellent observer[479] noticed in 1792 that the preceding forty or
fifty years had witnessed the total destruction in England of the once
common type of the small country squire. He was:--
'An independent gentleman of £300 per annum who commonly
appeared in a plain drab or plush coat, large silver buttons, a
jockey cap, and rarely without boots. His travels never
exceeded the distance of the county town, and that only at
assize or session time, or to attend an election. Once a week
he commonly dined at the next market town with the attorneys
and justices. He went to church regularly, read the weekly
journal, settled the parochial disputes, and afterwards
adjourned to the neighbouring alehouse, where he generally got
drunk for the good of his country. He was commonly followed by
a couple of greyhounds and a pointer, and announced his arrival
at a neighbour's house by smacking his whip and giving a view
halloo. His drink was generally ale, except on Christmas Day,
the Fifth of November, or some other gala day, when he would
make a bowl of strong brandy. The mansion of one of these
squires was of plaster striped with timber, not unaptly called
callimanco work, or of red brick with large casemented bow
windows; a porch with seats in it and over it a study: the
eaves of the house well inhabited by swallows, and the court
set round with hollyhocks; near the gate a horse-block for
mounting. The hall was furnished with flitches of bacon, and
the mantelpiece with guns and fishing-rods of different
dimensions, accompanied by the broadsword, partisan, and dagger
borne by his ancestor in the Civil Wars. Against the wall was
posted King Charles's _Golden Rules_, Vincent Wing's _Almanac_
and a portrait of the Duke of Marlborough; in his window lay
Baker's _Chronicle_, Foxe's _Book of Martyrs_, Glanvill _On
Apparitions_, Quincey's _Dispensatory_, _The Complete Justice_,
and a _Book of Farriery_. In a corner by the fireside stood a
large wooden two-armed chair with a cushion, and within the
chimney corner were a couple of seats. Here at Christmas he
entertained his tenants, assembled round a glowing fire made of
the roots of trees; and told and heard the traditionary tales
of the village about ghosts and witches while a jorum of ale
went round. These men and their houses are no more.'
The farmer, in some parts at all events, was becoming a more civilized
individual; the late race had lived in the midst of their enlightened
neighbours like beings of another order[480]; in their personal labour
they were indefatigable, in their fare hard, in their dress homely, in
their manners rude. The French and American War of 1775-83 was a very
prosperous time, and the farmer's mode of living greatly improved.
Farmhouses in England, it was noticed, were in general well furnished
with every convenient accommodation. Into many of them a 'barometer
had of late years been introduced'. The teapot and the mug of ale
jointly possessed the breakfast table, and meat and pudding smoked on
the board every noon. Formerly one might see at church what was the
cut of a coat half a century ago, now dress was spruce and
modern.[481] As a proof of the spirit of improvement among farmers,
Marshall instances the custom in the Midlands of placing their sons as
pupils on other farms to widen their experience. 'Their entertainments
are as expensive as they are elegant, for it is no uncommon thing for
one of these new-created farmers to spend £10 or £12, at one
entertainment, and to have the most expensive wines; to set off the
entertainment in the greatest splendour an elegant sideboard of plate
is provided in the newest fashion.'[482] As to dress, no one could
tell the farmer's daughter from the duke's. Marshall noticed that in
Warwickshire the harness of the farmer's teams was often ridiculously
ornamented, and the horses were overfed and underworked to save their
looks. Before enclosure the farmer entertained his friends with bacon
fed by himself, washed down with ale brewed from his own malt, in a
brown jug, or a glass if he was extravagant. He wore a coat of woollen
stuff, the growth of his own flock, spun by his wife and daughters,
his stockings came from the same quarter, so did the clothes of his
family.
Some of these farmers were doing their share in helping the progress
of agriculture. In 1764 Joseph Elkington, of Princethorpe in
Warwickshire, was the first to practise the under drainage of sloping
land that was drowned by the bursting of springs. He drained some
fields at Princethorpe which were very wet, and dug a trench 4 or 5
feet deep for this purpose; but finding this did not reach the
principal body of subjacent water, he drove an iron bar 4 feet below
the bottom of his trench and on withdrawing it the water gushed out.
He was thus led to combine the system of cutting drains, aided when
necessary by auger holes. His main principles were three: (1) Finding
the main spring, or cause of the mischief. (2) Taking the level of
that spring and ascertaining its subterranean bearings, for if the
drain is cut a yard below the line of the spring the water issuing
from it cannot be reached, but on ascertaining the line by levelling
the spring can be cut effectually. (3) Using the auger to tap the
spring when the drain was not deep enough for the purpose.[483] It was
owing to the Board of Agriculture at the end of the century that he
obtained the vote of £1,000 from Parliament, and a skilful surveyor
was appointed to observe his methods and give them to the public, for
he was too ignorant himself to give an intelligible account of his
system. After the publication of the report his system was followed
generally until Smith of Deanston in 1835 gave the method now in use
to his country.
Robert Bakewell, who did more to improve live stock than any other
man, was born at Dishley, Leicestershire, in 1735, and succeeding to
the management of his father's farm in 1760 began to make experiments
in breeding.[484] He scorned the old idea that the blood must be
constantly varied by the mixture of different breeds, and his new
system differed from the old in two chief points: (1) small versus
large bone, and consequently a greater proportion of flesh and a
greater tendency to fatten; (2) permissible in-breeding versus
perpetual crossing with strange breeds. He took immense pains in
selecting the best animals to breed from, and had at Dishley a museum
of skeletons and pickled specimens for the comparison of one
generation with another, and he conducted careful post-mortem
examinations on his stock. His great production was the new Leicester
breed of sheep,[485] which in half a century spread over every part of
the United Kingdom, as well as to Europe and America, and gave England
2 lb. of meat where she had one before. Sheep at this time were
divided into two main classes: (1) short-woolled or field sheep, fed
in the open fields; (2) long-woolled or pasture sheep, fed in
enclosures. That they were not at a very high state of perfection may
be gathered from this description of the chief variety of the latter,
the 'Warwickshire' breed: 'his frame large and loose, his bones heavy,
his legs long and thick, his chine as well as his rump as sharp as a
hatchet, his skin rattling on his ribs like a skeleton covered with
parchments.' The origin of the new Leicester sheep is uncertain, but
apparently the old Lincoln breed was the basis of it, though this,
like other large breeds of English sheep, was itself an introduction
of the last half century. The new sheep was described as having a
clean head, straight broad flat back, barrel-like body, fine small
eyes, thin feet, mutton fat, fine-grained and of good flavour, wool 8
lb. to the fleece, and wethers at two years old weighed from 20 to 30
lb. a quarter.
By 1770 his rams were hired for 25 guineas a season, and soon after he
made £3,000 a year by their hire, one named 'Two-pounder' bringing him
1,200 guineas in one year.
One of his theories was that the poorer the land the more it demanded
well-made sheep, which is no doubt true to a certain extent; but it
has been proved conclusively since that the quality of the breed
gradually drops to the level of the land unless artificially assisted.
At his death he left two distinct breeds of sheep, for he improved on
his own new Leicester, so that the improved became the 'New Leicester'
and the former the 'Old Leicester.' However, at the time and,
afterwards, his sheep were generally called 'New Leicesters', and
sometimes the 'Dishley breed'. There was much prejudice among farmers
against the new breed; in the Midlands most of the farmers would have
nothing to do with them, and 'their grounds were stocked with
creatures that would disgrace the meanest lands in the kingdom.' Yet
in April, 1786, yearling wethers of the new breed were sold for 28s.
while those of the old were 16s.
The cattle which he set to work to improve were the famous old longhorn
breed, the prevailing breed of the Midlands, which had already been
considerably improved by Webster of Canley in Warwickshire, and
others, especially in Lancashire and the north. The kind of cattle
esteemed hitherto had been 'the large, long-bodied, big-boned, coarse,
flat-sided kind, and often lyery or black-fleshed.'[486] He founded
his herd upon two heifers of Webster's and a bull from Westmoreland,
and from these bred all his cattle. The celebrated bull 'Twopenny' was
a son of the Westmoreland bull and one of these heifers, who came to
be celebrated in agricultural history as 'Old Comely', for she was
slaughtered at the age of twenty-six. He bred his cattle so that they
produced an enormous amount of fat, as hitherto there had been a
difficulty in producing animals to fatten readily; but this he pushed
to too great an extreme, so that there has been a reaction. The
following is a description of a six-year-old bull, got by 'Twopenny'
out of a Canley cow: 'His head, chest, and neck remarkably fine and
clean; his chest extraordinarily deep; his brisket bearing down to his
knees; his chine thin, loin narrow at the chine, but remarkably wide
at the hips. Quarters long, round bones snug, but thighs rather full
and remarkably let down. The carcase throughout, chine excepted,
large, roomy, deep, and well spread.'[487] The new longhorn, however
good for the grazier, was not a good milker. Bakewell was a great
believer in straw as a food, and strongly objected to having it
trodden into manure; his beasts were largely fed on it, in such small
quantities that they greedily ate what was before them and wasted
little. His activity was not confined to the breeding of cattle and
sheep, for he also produced a breed of black horses, thick and short
in the body, with very short legs and very powerful, two ploughing 4
acres a day, a statement which seems much exaggerated; and was famous
for his skill in irrigating meadows, by which he could cut grass four
times a year. He was a firm believer in the wisdom of treating stock
gently and kindly, and his sheep were kept as clean as racehorses. A
visitor to Dishley saw a bull of huge proportions, with enormous
horns, led about by a boy of seven. He travelled much, and admired the
farms of Norfolk most in England, and those of Holland and Flanders
abroad, founding his own system on these. It was his opinion that the
Devon breed of cattle were incapable of improvement by a cross of any
other breed, and that from the West Highland heifer the best breed of
cattle might be produced.
He died in 1795, and apparently did not keep what he made, owing
largely to his boundless hospitality, which had entertained Russian
princes, German royal dukes, English peers, and travellers from all
countries. His breed of cattle has completely disappeared, unless
traces survive in the lately resuscitated longhorn breed, but his
principles are still acted upon, viz. the correlation of form, and the
practice of consanguineous breeding under certain conditions.
Bakewell's earliest pupil was George Culley, who devoted himself to
improving the breed of cattle, and became one of the most famous
agriculturists at the end of the eighteenth and the commencement of
the nineteenth centuries. Another farmer to whom English agriculture
owes much was John Ellman of Glynde, born in 1753, who by careful
selection firmly established the reputation of the Southdown sheep
which had previously been hardly recognized. He was one of the
founders of the Smithfield Cattle Show in 1793, which helped
materially to improve the live stock of the country.
The relations between landlord and tenant, judging from the accounts
of contemporary writers, were generally good. Leases were less
frequent than agreements voidable by six months' notice on either
side, and when there was a tenancy-at-will the tenant who entered as a
young man was often expected to hand on the holding to his posterity,
and therefore executed improvements at his own cost, so complete was
the trust between landlord and tenant. Tenants then did much that they
would refuse to do to-day, as the following lease, common in the
Midlands in 1786, shows[488]:
Tenant agrees to take, &c., and to pay the stipulated rent
within forty days, without any deduction for taxes, and
double rent so long as he continues to hold after notice
given.
To repair buildings, accidents by fire excepted.
To repair gates and fences.
When required, to cut and plash the hedges, and make the
ditches 3 feet by 2 feet, or pay or cause to be paid to
the landlord 1s. per rood for such as shall not be done
after three months' notice has been given in writing.
Not to break up certain lands specified in the schedule,
'under £20 an acre.'
Not to plough more than a specified number of acres of the
rest of the land in any one year, under the same penalty.
To forfeit the same sum for every acre that shall be ploughed
for any longer time than three crops successively, without
making a clean summer fallow thereof after the third
crop.
And the like sum for every acre over and above a specified
number (clover excepted) that shall be mown in any one
year.
At the time of laying down arable lands to grass he shall
manure them with 8 quarters of lime per acre, and sow
the same with 12 lb. of clover seeds, and one bushel of
rye-grass per acre.
Shall spend on the premises all hay, straw, and manure, or
leave them at the end of the term.
Tenant on quitting to be allowed for hay left on the premises,
for clover and rye-grass sown in the last year, and for all
fallows made within that time.'[489]
A striking picture of the conditions prevailing in many parts of
England at this period is given by Mr. Loch in his account of the
estates of the Marquis of Stafford.[490] When this nobleman inherited
his property in Staffordshire and Shropshire, much of the land, as in
other parts of England, was held on leases for three lives, a system
said to have been ruinous in its effects. Although the farms were held
at one-third of their value, nothing could be worse than the course of
cultivation pursued, no improvements were carried out, and all that
could be hoped for was that the land would not be entirely run out
when the lease expired. The closes were extremely small and of the
most irregular shape; the straggling fences occupied a large portion
of the land; the crookedness of the ditches, by keeping the water
stagnant, added to, rather than relieved, the wetness of the soil.
Farms were much scattered, and to enable the occupiers to get at their
land, lanes wound backwards and forwards from field to field, covering
a large quantity of ground.
It is to the great credit of the Marquis of Stafford that this
miserable state of things was swept away. Lands were laid together,
the size of the fields enlarged, hedges and ditches straightened, the
drainage conducted according to a uniform plan, new and substantial
buildings erected, indeed the whole countryside transformed.
Another evil custom on the estate had been to permit huts of miserable
construction to be erected to the number of several hundreds by the
poorest, and in many instances the most profligate, of the population.
They were not regularly entered in the rental account, but had a
nominal payment fixed upon them which was paid annually at the court
leet. These cottages were built on the sides of the roads and on the
lord's waste, which was gradually absorbed by the encroachment, which
the occupiers of these huts made from time to time by enclosing the
land that lay next them. These wretched holdings gradually fell into
the hands of a body of middlemen, who underlet them at an extravagant
rent to the occupiers; and these men began to consider that they had
an interest independent of the landlord, and had at times actually
mortgaged, sold, and devised it. This abuse was also put an end to,
the cottagers being made immediate tenants of the landlord, to their
great gain, but to this day small aggregations of houses in Shropshire
called 'Heaths' mark the encroachments of these squatters on the
roadside wastes. This class, indeed, has been well known in England
since the Middle Ages. Norden speaks of them in 1602, and so do many
subsequent writers. Numbers of small holdings exist to-day obtained in
this manner, and the custom must to some extent have counteracted the
effect of enclosure.[491]
The roads of England up to the end of the eighteenth century were
generally in a disgraceful condition. Some improvement was effected in
the latter half of the century, but it was not until the days of
Telford and Macadam that they assumed the appearance with which we are
familiar; and long after that, though the main roads were excellent,
the by-roads were often atrocious, as readers of such books as
_Handley Cross_, written in the middle of the nineteenth century, will
remember.
Defoe in his tour in 1724 found the road between S. Albans and
Nottingham 'perfectly frightful,' and the great number of horses
killed by the 'labour of these heavy ways a great charge to the
country'. He notes, however, an improvement from turnpikes. Many of
the roads were much worn by the continual passing of droves of heavy
cattle on their way to London. Sheep could not travel in the winter to
London as the roads were too heavy, so that the price of mutton at
that season in town was high. Breeders were often compelled to sell
them cheap before they got to London, because the roads became
impassable for their flocks when the bad weather set in.[492]
In 1734 Lord Cathcart wrote in his diary: 'All went well until I
arrived within 3 miles of Doncaster, when suddenly my horse fell with
a crash and with me under him. I fancied myself crushed to death. I
slept at Doncaster and had a bad night. I was so bad all day, that I
could get no further than Wetherby. Next day I was all right again. I
had another terrible fall between North Allerton and Darlington, but
was not a bit the worse.'[493]
It was owing to this defective condition of the roads that the prices
of corn still differed greatly in various localities; there would be a
glut in one place and a deficiency in another, with no means of
equalizing matters. To the same cause must be attributed in great
measure the slow progress made in the improvement of agriculture. New
discoveries travelled very slowly; the expense of procuring manure
beyond that produced on the farm was prohibitive; and the uncertain
returns which arose from such confined markets caused the farmer to
lack both spirit and ability to exert himself in the cultivation of
his land.[494] Therefore farming was limited to procuring the
subsistence of particular farms rather than feeding the public. The
opposition to better roads was due in great measure to the landowners,
who feared that if the markets in their neighbourhood were rendered
accessible to distant farmers their estates would suffer. But they
were not alone in their opposition; in the reign of Queen Anne the
people of Northampton were against any improvement in the navigation
of the Nene, because they feared that corn from Huntingdon and
Cambridge would come up the river and spoil their market.[495] Horner
was very enthusiastic over the improvement recently effected: 'our
very carriages travel with almost winged expedition between every town
of consequence in the kingdom and the metropolis' and inland
navigation was soon likely to be established in every part, in
consequence of which the demand for the produce of the land increased
and the land itself became more valuable and rents rose. 'There never
was a more astonishing revolution accomplished in the internal system
of any country'; and the carriage of grain was effected with half the
former number of horses.
It is clear, however, that he was easily satisfied, and this opinion
must be compared with the statements of Young and Marshall, who were
continually travelling all over England some time after it was
written, and found the roads, in many parts, in a very bad state.
Even near London they were often terrible. 'Of all the cursed roads
that ever disgraced this kingdom in the very ages of barbarism, none
ever equalled that from Billericay to the King's Head at Tilbury.[496]
It is for near 12 miles so narrow that a mouse cannot pass by any
carriage. I saw a fellow creep under his wagon to assist me to lift,
if possible, my chaise over a hedge. The ruts are of an incredible
depth, and everywhere chalk wagons were stuck fast till 20 or 30
horses tacked to each drew them out one by one' Others said that
turnpike roads were the enemies of cheapness; as soon as they opened
up secluded spots, low prices vanished and all tended to one level.
Owing to the work of Telford and Macadam, the high roads by the first
quarter of the nineteenth century attained a high pitch of excellence;
and were thronged with traffic, coaches, postchaises, private
carriages, equestrians, carts and wagons: so animated a sight that our
forefathers built small houses called 'gazebos' on the sides of the
road, where they met to take tea and watch the ever varying stream. It
should not be forgotten, too, that the inns, where numbers of horses
put up, were splendid markets for the farmers' oats, hay, and straw.
The seasons in the latter part of the eighteenth century were
distinguished for being frequently bad. In 1774 Gilbert White wrote,
'Such a run of wet seasons as we have had the last ten or eleven years
would have produced a famine a century or two ago.' Owing to the
dearness of bread in 1767 riots broke out in many places, many lives
were lost, and the gaols were filled with prisoners.[497] 1779 was,
however, a year of great fertility and prices were low all round:
wheat 33s. 8d., barley 26s., oats 13s. 6d., wool 12s. a tod of 28 lb.:
and there were many complaints of ruined farmers and distressed
landlords. Though England was now becoming an importing country, the
amount of corn imported was insufficient to have any appreciable
effect on prices, which were mainly influenced by the seasons, as the
following instance of the fluctuations caused by a single bad season
(1782) testifies[498]:
Prices after harvest of 1781. Prices after harvest of 1782.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Wheat, per bushel 5 0 Wheat, per bushel 10 6
Barley " 2 9 Barley " 7 2
Dutch oats for seed 1 8 Dutch oats for seed 3 6
Clover seed, per cwt. 1 11 6 Clover seed, per cwt. 5 10 0
The summer of 1783 was amazing and portentous and full of horrible
phenomena, according to White, with a peculiar haze or smoky fog
prevailing for many weeks. 'The sun at noon looked as blank as a
clouded moon, and shed a rust-coloured ferruginous light on the ground
and floors of rooms.' This was succeeded by a very severe winter, the
thermometer on December 10 being 1° below zero; the worst since
1739-40.
In 1788 occurred a severe drought in the summer, 5,000 horned cattle
perishing for lack of water.[499] In 1791 there was a remarkable
change of temperature in the middle of June, the thermometer in a few
days falling from 75° to 25°, and the hills of Kent and Surrey were
covered with snow.
We have now to deal with one of those landowners whose great example
is one of the glories of English agriculture. Coke of Holkham began
his great agricultural work about 1776 on an estate where, as old Lady
Townshend said, 'all you will see will be one blade of grass and two
rabbits fighting for that;' in fact it was little better than a rabbit
warren. It has been said that all the wheat consumed in the county of
Norfolk was at this time imported from abroad; but this is in direct
contradiction to Young's assertion, already noted, that there were in
1767 great quantities of wheat besides other crops in the county.
Coke's estate indeed seems to have been considerably behind many parts
of the shire when he began his farming career.[500] When Coke came
into his estate, in five leases which were about to expire the farms
were held at 3s. 6d. an acre; and in the previous leases they had been
1s. 6d. an acre. We may judge of the quality of this land by comparing
it with the average rent of 10s. which Young says prevailed at this
time. With a view to remedy this state of things he studied the
agriculture of other counties, and his observations thereon reveal a
very poor kind of farming in many places: in Cheshire the rich pasture
was wasted and the poor impoverished by sheer ignorance, in Yorkshire
luxuriant grass was understocked, in Shropshire there were hardly any
sheep; in his own part of Norfolk the usual rotation was three white
straw crops and then broadcast turnips.[501] This Coke changed to two
white crops and two years pasture, and he dug up and brought to the
surface the rich marl which lay under the flint and sand, so that
clover and grasses began to grow. So successful was he in this that in
1796 he cut nearly 400 tons of sainfoin from 104 acres of land
previously valued at 12s. an acre. He increased his flock of sheep
from 800 worthless animals with backs as narrow as rabbits, the
description of the Norfolk sheep of the day, to 2,500 good Southdowns.
Encouraged by the Duke of Bedford, another great agriculturist, he
started a herd of North Devons, and, fattening two Devons against one
Shorthorn, found the former weighed 140 stone, the latter 110, and the
Shorthorn had eaten more food than the two Devons. However, a single
experiment of this kind is not very conclusive.
The ploughs of Norfolk were, as in many other counties, absurdly
over-horsed, from three to five being used when only two were
necessary; so Coke set the example of using two whenever possible, and
won a bet with Sir John Sebright by ploughing an acre of stiff land in
Hertfordshire in a day with a pair of horses. He transformed the bleak
bare countryside by planting 50 acres of trees every year until he had
3,000 acres well covered, and in 1832 had probably the unique
experience of embarking in a ship which was built of oak grown from
the acorns he had himself planted.[502] Between 1776 and 1842 (the
date of his death) he is said to have spent £536,992 on improving his
estate, without reckoning the large sums spent on his house and
demesne, the home farm, and his marsh farm of 459 acres. This
expenditure paid in the long run, but when he entered upon it, it must
have seemed very doubtful if this would be the case. A good
understanding between landlord and tenant was the basis of his policy,
and to further this he let his farms on long leases, at moderate
rents, with few restrictions. When farmers improved their holdings on
his estate the rent was not raised on them, so that the estate
benefited greatly, and good tenants were often rewarded by having
excellent houses built for them; so good, indeed, that his political
opponents the Tories, whom he, as a staunch Whig detested, made it one
of their complaints against him that he built palaces for farmhouses.
At first he met with that stolid opposition to progress which seems
the particular characteristic of the farmer. For sixteen years no one
followed him in the use of the drill, though it was no new thing; and
when it was adopted he reckoned its use spread at the rate of a mile a
year. Yet eventually he had his reward; his estate came to command the
pick of English tenant farmers, who never left it except through old
age, and would never live under any other landlord. Even the Radical
Cobbett, to whom, as to most of his party, landlords were, and are,
the objects of inveterate hatred, said that every one who knew him
spoke of him with affection. Coke was the first to distinguish between
the adaptability of the different kinds of grass seeds to different
soils, and thereby made the hitherto barren lands of his estate better
pasture land than that of many rich counties. Carelessness about the
quality of grasses sown was universal for a long time. The farmer took
his seeds from his own foul hayrick, or sent to his neighbour for a
supply of rubbish; even Bakewell derived his stock from his hayloft.
It was not until the Society for the Encouragement of Arts offered
prizes for clean hay seeds that some improvement was noticeable. In
Norfolk, as in other parts of England, there was at this time a strong
prejudice against potatoes; the villagers of Holkham refused to have
anything to do with them, but Coke's invincible persistency overcame
this unreasoning dislike and soon they refused to do without them.
Coke was a great advocate for sowing wheat early and very thick in the
rows, and for cutting it when ear and stem were green and the grain
soft, declaring that by so doing he got 2s. a quarter more for it; he
also believed in the early cutting of oats and peas. It was his custom
to drill 4 bushels of wheat per acre, which he said prevented
tillering and mildew. He was the first to grow swedes on a large
scale.[503] The famous Holkham Sheep-shearings, known locally as
'Coke's Clippings', which began in 1778 and lasted till 1821, arose
from his practice of gathering farmers together for consultation on
matters agricultural, and developed into world-famous meetings
attended by all nationalities and all ranks, men journeying from
America especially to attend them, and Lafayette expressed it as one
of his great regrets that he had never attended one. At these
gatherings all were equal, the suggestion of the smallest tenant
farmer was listened to with respect, and the same courtesy and
hospitality were shown to all whether prince or farmer. At the last
meeting in 1821 no less than 7,000 people were present. His skill,
energy, and perseverance worked a revolution in the crops; his own
wheat crops were from 10 to 12 coombs an acre, his barley sometimes
nearly 20. The annual income of timber and underwood was £2,700, and
from 1776 to 1816 he increased the rent roll of his estate from £2,200
to £20,000, which, even after allowing for the great advance in prices
during that period, is a wonderful rise. It is a very significant fact
that there was not an alehouse on the estate, and in connexion with
this, and with the fact that his improvements made a constant demand
for labour, we are not surprised to learn that the workhouse was
pulled down as useless, for it was always empty, and this at a time
when the working-classes of England were pauperized to an alarming
degree. The year 1818 was one of terrible distress all over England in
country and town, yet at his sheep-shearing of that year Coke was
enabled to say he had trebled the population of his estate and not a
single person was out of employment, though everywhere else farmers
were turning off hands and cutting down wages. Principally through his
agency, between 1804 and 1821, no less than 153 enclosures took place
in Norfolk, while between 1790 and 1810, 2,000,000 acres of waste land
in England were brought under cultivation largely by his efforts. He
is said, indeed, to have transformed agriculture throughout England,
and, but for that, the country would not have been able to grow enough
food for its support during the war with Napoleon, and must have
succumbed.
FOOTNOTES:
[440] _Northern Tour_, i. 9. For an interesting account of Young, see
_R.A.S.E. Journal_ (3rd Series), iv. 1.
[441] In 1726 Bradley had urged the use of liquorice, madder, woad,
and caraway as improvers of the land in the Preface to the _Country
Gentleman_.
[442] _Rural Economy_ (1771), pp. 173-5. Trusler, who wrote in 1780,
mentions 'the general rage for farming throughout the
kingdom.'--_Practical Husbandry_, p. I.
[443] In 1780 Sir Thomas Bernard, travelling through Northumberland,
saw 'luxuriant plantations, neat hedges, rich crops of corn,
comfortable farmhouses' in a county whereof the greater part was
barren moor dearly rented at 1s. 6d. an acre thirty years before, and
he said the county had increased in annual value fourfold,
(Contemporary MS., unpublished.)
[444] _Rural Economy_, p. 26.
[445] _Farmer's Letters_ (3rd ed.), p. 89.
[446] Slater, _English Peasantry and Enclosure_, p. 95.
[447] Ibid. p. 101.
[448] Young, _Northern Tour_, iv. 340, about 1770 estimates the
cultivated land of England to be half pasture and half arable, and, in
the absence of reliable statistics, his opinion on this point is
certainly the best available. The conversion of a large portion of the
richer land from arable to grass in the eighteenth century was
compensated for, according to Young, by the conversion, on enclosure,
of poor sandy soils and heaths or moors into corn land. Hasbach, _op.
cit._ pp. 370-1.
[449] Young, _Northern Tour_, i. 222.
[450] _Rural Economy_, p. 252.
[451] Ibid. p. 271.
[452] Cf. above, p. 180.
[453] _Farmer's Letters_ (3rd ed), p. 372.
[454] _Northern Tour_, iv. 167.
[455] Ibid. iv. 186.
[456] This large item is explained by the fact that a bailiff was
employed to sell, and no bailiff could find customers 'without feeling
the same drought as stage coachmen when they see a sign'.--Young,
_Farmer's Letters_, p. 403.
[457] _Rural Economy_, p. 314.
[458] 1775, pp. x-xiii.
[459] _Northern Tour_, iv. 192-202.
[460] See _Parliamentary Reports Commission_ (1881), xvi. 260.
[461] _Dissertations on Rural Subjects_, p. 278.
[462] _Farmer's Letters_, p. 433.
[463] _History of Hawsted_, p. 169.
[464] Hasbach, _op. cit._ p. 127; Kent, _Hints to Gentlemen_, p. 152.
[465] _Southern Tour_, p. 324. He says nothing of the manufacturing
towns, which had not yet began to influence the wages of farm
labourers near them as they soon afterwards did.
[466] Some prices at this time were: bread per lb., 2d.; butter,
5-1/2d. to 8d.; cheese, 3-1/2d. to 4d.; beef, 3d. to 5d.; mutton,
3-1/2d. to 5d.
[467] _State of the Poor_, i. 562.
[468] According to Walter Harte, though the yeoman in the middle of
the seventeenth century ate bread of rye and barley (maslin), in 1766
even the poor cottagers looked upon it with horror and demanded best
wheaten bread. Yet in 1766 the quartern loaf in London was 1s.
6d.--Tooke, _History of Prices_, i. 68.
[469] _History of Hawsted_, p. 184.
[470] Eden, _State of the Poor_, i. 513.
[471] _Rural Economy of Gloucestershire_, i. 53.
[472] Eden, _op. cit._ i. 547.
[473] _Farmer's Letters_, i. 300
[474] The pulling down of cottages began to be complained of in the
seventeenth century; they harboured the poor, who were a charge upon
the parish, and repairs were saved.--_Transactions Royal Historical
Society_ (New Series), xix. 120.
[475] Hasbach, _op. cit._ 82; Clarke, _General View of Herefordshire_,
p. 29; Marshall, _Review of Northern Department_, p. 375.
[476] Tooke, _History of Prices_, i. 50; Hallam, _Constitutional
History_, iii. 302.
[477] _Northern Tour_, iv. 420. The increase in population in the
first half of the eighteenth century was slow; after the Peace of
Paris in 1763, when the commerce and manufactures of the country were
extended in an unprecedented degree, it was rapid.
[478] _The Way to be Rich and Respectable_, London, 1780.
[479] Grose, _Olio_, pp. 41-4; Lecky, _History of England in
Eighteenth Century_, vi. 169 et. seq.
[480] Cullum, _History of Hawsted_, p. 219.
[481] Cullum, _History of Hawsted_, p. 225.
[482] _Thoughts on Enclosure, by a Country Farmer_ (1786), p. 21.
[483] Johnstone, _Account of Elkington's Draining_ (1797), pp. 8-9.
[484] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (1894), p. 11, from which this account of
Bakewell is mainly taken.
[485] According to some, Joseph Allom originated the breed, and
Bakewell vastly improved it. We may safely give the chief credit to so
careful and gifted a breeder as Bakewell.
[486] _Culley on Live Stock_ (1807), p. 56.
[487] Marshall, _Rural Economy of the Midland Counties_, i. 273.
[488] _Victoria County History: Warwickshire, Agriculture_.
[489] In Lancashire at this date it was not uncommon, when a tenant
wished for his farm or a particular field to be improved by draining,
marling, liming, or laying down to grass, to hand it over to the
landlord for the process; who, when completed, returned it to the
tenant with an advanced rent of 10 per cent. upon the
improvements.--Marshall, _Review of Reports to Board of Agriculture_
(under Lancashire).
[490] 1820, p. 173 et seq.
[491] See Hasbach, _op. cit._ pp. 77 sq.; _Annals of Agriculture_,
xxxvi. 497; Scrutton, _Commons and Common Fields_, p. 139.
[492] Defoe, _Tour_, ii. 178 et seq.
[493] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (3rd Ser.), ii. 9.
[494] Horner, _Inquiry into the Means of Preserving the Public Roads_
(1767), pp. 4 et seq.
[495] _Victoria County History: Northants._, ii. 250.
[496] Young, _Southern Tour_ (ed. 2), p. 88.
[497] Tooke, _History of Prices_, i. 68. It is difficult to understand
the price of the quartern loaf, 1s. 6d. in 1766, as wheat was only
43s. 1d. a quarter. Prices of wheat in these years were:
s. d.
1767 47 4
1768 53 9
1769 40 7
1770 43 6
1771 47 2
1772 50 8
1773 51 0
1774 52 8
1775 48 4
1776 38 2
1777 45 6
1778 42 0
1779 33 8
These returns differ from those of the Board of Agriculture; see
Appendix III.
[498] _Annals of Agriculture_, iii. 366.
[499] Baker, _Seasons and Prices_, pp. 224 et seq.
[500] A. Stirling, _Coke of Holkham_, i. 249.
[501] But in other parts of it the cultivation of turnips was well
understood, for the _Complete Farmer_, s.v. _Turnips_ (ed. 3), says
that about 1750 Norfolk farmers boasted that turnips had doubled the
value of their holdings, and Norfolk men were famous for understanding
hoeing and thinning, which were little practised elsewhere. Further,
Young, _Southern Tour_, p. 273, says: 'the extensive use of turnips is
known but little of except in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex. I found no
farmers but in these counties that understood anything of fatting
cattle with them; feeding lean sheep being the only use they put them
to.'
[502] A. Stirling, _op. cit._ i. 264.
[503] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (1895), p. 12.
CHAPTER XVII
1793-1815
THE GREAT FRENCH WAR.--THE BOARD OF AGRICULTURE.--HIGH PRICES, AND
HEAVY TAXATION.
This period, that of the great war with France, was one generally of
high prices and prosperity for landowners and farmers. It was a
prosperity, however, that was largely fictitious, and when the high
prices of the war time were over, it was succeeded by many disastrous
years. The prosperity, too, was also largely neutralized by a crushing
weight of taxation and rates, while the labourer, although his wages
were increased, found prices grow at a much greater rate, and it was,
as Thorold Rogers has said, the most miserable period in his history.
Its commencement was marked by the foundation of the Board of
Agriculture. On May 15, 1793, Sir John Sinclair[504] moved in the
House of Commons, 'that His Majesty would take into his consideration
the advantages which might be derived from the establishment of such a
board, for though in some particular districts improved methods of
cultivating the soil were practised, yet in the greatest part of these
kingdoms the principles of agriculture are not sufficiently
understood, nor are the implements of husbandry or the stock of the
farmer brought to that perfection of which they are capable. His
Majesty's faithful Commons were persuaded that if it were founded a
spirit of improvement might be encouraged, which would result in
important national benefits.
The motion was carried by 101 to 26. By its charter the board
consisted of a president, 16 ex-officio and 30 ordinary members, with
honorary and corresponding members. It was not a Government department
in the modern sense of the term, but a society for the encouragement
of agriculture, as the Royal Society is for the encouragement of
science. It was, indeed, supported by parliamentary grants, receiving
a sum of £3,000 a year, but the Government had only a limited control
over its affairs through the ex-officio members, among whom were the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Lord Chancellor, the First
Lord of the Admiralty, and the Speaker.
The first president was Sir John Sinclair, and the first secretary
Arthur Young, with a salary of £400 a year, which he thought
insufficient.[505] The first task of the new board was that of
preparing statistical accounts of English agriculture, and it was
intended to take in hand the commutation of tithes, which would have
been a great boon to farmers, with whom the prevailing system of
collecting tithes was very unpopular; but the Primate's opposition
stopped this. The board appointed lecturers, procured a reward for
Elkington for his draining system, encouraged Macadam in his plans for
improving roads, and Meikle the inventor of the thrashing machine, and
obtained the removal of taxes on draining tiles, and other taxes
injurious to agriculture. It also recommended the allotment system,
and Sinclair desired 3 acres and a cow for every industrious cottager.
During the abnormally high prices of provisions from 1794-6, the
quartern loaf in London in 1795 being 1s. 6d., though next year it
dropped to 7-3/4d.,[506] the board made experiments in making bread
with substitutes for wheat, which resulted in a public exhibition of
eighty different sorts of bread. Its efforts were generally followed
by increased zeal among agriculturists; but Sinclair, an able but
impetuous man,[507] appears to have taken things too much into his own
hands and pushed them too speedily.
Financial difficulties came, chiefly owing to the cost of the surveys,
which had been hurried on with undue haste and often with great
carelessness, the surveyors sometimes being men who knew nothing of
the subject.
Sinclair was deposed from the presidency in 1798, and succeeded by
Lord Somerville. He again was succeeded by Lord Carrington, under
whose presidency the board offered premiums (the first of £200), owing
to the high price of wheat and consequent distress, for essays on the
best means of converting certain portions of grass land into tillage
without exhausting the soil, and of returning the same to grass, after
a certain period, in an improved state, or at least without injury.
The general report, based on the information derived from these
essays, states that no high price of corn or temporary distress would
justify the ploughing up of old meadows or rich pastures, and that on
certain soils well adapted to grass age improves the quality of the
pasture to a degree which no system of management on lands broken up
and laid down can equal. In spite of this, the cupidity of landowners
and farmers, when wheat was a guinea a bushel or at prices near it,
led to the ploughing up of much splendid grass land, which was never
laid down again until, perhaps in recent years, owing to the low price
of grain; so that some of the land at all events has, owing to bad
times, returned to the state best suited to it.
The board looked upon the enclosure and cultivation of waste lands,
which in England they estimated at 6,000,000 acres,[508] as a panacea
for the prevailing distress, and after much opposition they managed to
pass through both Houses in 1801 a Bill cheapening and facilitating
the process of parliamentary enclosure. This Act, 41 Geo. III, c. 109,
'extracted a number of clauses from various private Acts and enacted
that they should hold good in all cases where the special Act did not
expressly provide to the contrary.' Another benefit rendered to
agriculture was the establishment in 1803 of lectures on agricultural
chemistry, the first lecturer engaged being Mr., afterwards Sir
Humphry, Davy, who may be regarded as the father of agricultural
chemistry.
In 1806 Sinclair was re-elected president, and his second term was
mainly devoted to completing the agricultural surveys of the different
counties, which, before his retirement in 1813, he had with one or two
exceptions the satisfaction of seeing finished. Though over-impetuous,
he rendered valuable service to agriculture, not only by his own
energy but by stirring up energy in others; as William Wilberforce the
philanthrophist said, 'I have myself seen collected in that small room
several of the noblemen and gentlemen of the greatest properties in
the British Isles, all of them catching and cultivating an
agricultural spirit, and going forth to spend in the employment of
labourers, and I hope in the improvement of land, immense sums which
might otherwise have been lavished on hounds and horses, or squandered
on theatricals.'
Among the numerous subjects into which the board inquired was the
divining rod for finding water, which was tested in Hyde Park in 1801,
and successfully stood the test. In 1805, Davy the chemist reported on
a substance in South America called 'guana', which he had analysed and
found to contain one-third of ammoniacal salt with other salts and
carbon, but its use was not to come for another generation. From the
time of Sinclair's retirement in 1813 the board declined. Arthur
Young, its secretary, had become blind and his capacity therefore
impaired. One year its lack of energy was shown by the return of
£2,000 of the Government grant to the Treasury because it had nothing
to spend it on. The Prime Minister, Lord Liverpool, was against it,
the clergy feared the commutation of tithe which the board advocated,
the legal profession was against the Enclosure Act, the landed
interest thought the surveys were intended for purposes of taxation;
and the grant being withdrawn, an effort to maintain the board by
voluntary subscription failed, so that it dissolved in 1822, after
doing much valuable work for English agriculture.
Before its extinction it had held in 1821, at Aldridge's Repository,
the first national agricultural show. £685 was given in prizes, and
the entries included 10 bulls, 9 cows and heifers, several fat steers
and cows, 7 pens of Leicester and Cotswold rams and ewes; 12 pens of
Down, and 9 or 10 pens of Merino rams and ewes.[509] Most of the
cattle shown were Shorthorn, or Durham, as they were then called, with
some Herefords, Devons, Longhorns, and Alderneys. There were also
exhibits of grass, turnip-seed, roots, and implements.
This first national show had been preceded by many local ones.[510]
The end of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth centuries
saw the establishment all over England of farmers' clubs, cattle
shows, and ploughing matches.
The period now before us is marked by the great work of the Collings,
who next to Bakewell did most to improve the cattle of the United
Kingdom. Charles Colling was born in 1751, and the scene of his famous
labours was Ketton near Darlington. He had learnt from Bakewell the
all-importance of quality in cattle, and determined to improve the
local Shorthorn breed near his own home, which had been described in
1744 as 'the most profitable beasts for the dairyman, butcher, and
grazier, with their wide bags, short horns, and large bodies.' He was
to make these 'profitable beasts' the best all-round cattle in the
world, and to succeed where George Culley had failed. The first bull
of merit he possessed was 'Hubback',[511] described as a little
yellow, red, and white five-year-old, which was mated with cows
afterwards to be famous, named Duchess, Daisy, Cherry, and Lady
Maynard. At first Colling was against in-breeding, and not until 1793
did he adopt it, more by accident than intention, but the experiment
being successful he became an enthusiast. The experiment was the
putting of Phoenix to Lord Bolingbroke, who was both her half-brother
and her nephew, and the result was the famous Favourite. A young
farmer who saw Favourite and his sister at Darlington in 1799, was so
struck by them that he paid Colling the first 100 guineas ever given
for a Shorthorn cow.[512]
One of Hubback's daughters had in 1795, by Favourite, a roan calf
which grew to be the celebrated Durham Ox, which at five and a half
years weighed 3,024 lb., and was sold for £140. It was sold again for
£250, the second purchaser refusing £2,000 for it, and taking it round
England on show made a profitable business out of it, in one day in
London making £97. A still more famous animal was the bull Comet, born
1804, which at the great sale in 1810 fetched 1,000 guineas. This bull
was the crowning triumph of Colling's career and the result of very
close breeding, being described as the best bull ever seen, with a
fine masculine head, broad and deep chest, shoulders well laid back,
loins good, hind-quarters long, straight and well packed, thighs
thick, with nice straight hocks and hind legs. Perhaps Colling thought
he had pursued in-and-in breeding too far, at all events in 1810 he
dispersed his famous herd. The sale was held at a most propitious
time, for the Durham Ox had advertised the name of Colling far and
wide, and owing to the war prices were very high. Comet fetched 1,000
guineas, and the other forty-seven lots averaged £151 8s. 5d., an
unheard-of sale, yet all the auctioneer got was 5 guineas, much of the
work of the sale falling on the owner, and the former sold the stock
with a sand-glass.
After the sale at Ketton, Brampton, the farm of Charles's brother
Robert, became the centre of interest to the Shorthorn world. Robert
obtained excellent prices for his stock, five daughters of his famous
bull George fetching 200 guineas each. Probably he, like his brother,
pursued in-and-in breeding too far, and in 1818 there was another
great sale; but war-prices had gone and agriculture was depressed, so
that the cattle fetched less than at Ketton, but still averaged £128
14s. 9d. for 61 lots, and 22 rams averaged £39 6s. 4d. Robert died in
1820, his brother in 1836.
It cannot be said that the Collings were the founders of a new breed
of cattle; they were the collectors and preservers of an ancient breed
that might otherwise have disappeared.[513] The object of good
breeders was now to get their cattle fat at an early age, and they so
far succeeded as to sell three-year-old steers for £20 apiece,
generally fed thus: in the first winter, hay and turnips; the
following summer, coarse pasture; the second winter, straw in the
foldyard and a few turnips; next summer, tolerable good pasture; and
the third winter, as many turnips as they could eat.[514]
Cattle at this time were classified thus: Shorthorns, Devons, Sussex,
Herefords (the two latter said by Culley to be varieties of the
Devon), Longhorned, Galloway or Polled, Suffolk Duns, Kyloes, and
Alderneys.
Sheep thus: the Dishley Breed (New Leicesters), Lincolns, Teeswaters,
Devonshire Notts, Exmoor, Dorsetshire, Herefordshire, Southdown,
Norfolk, Heath, Herdwick, Cheviot, Dunfaced, Shetland, Irish.[515]
With the increased demand for corn and meat from the towns the
necessity of new and better implements became apparent, and many
patents were taken out: by Praed, for drill ploughs, in 1781; by
Horn, for sowing machines, in 1784; by Heaton, for harrows, in 1787;
for sowing machines, by Sandilands, 1788; for reaping machines, by
Boyce, 1799; winnowing machines, by Cooch, 1800; haymakers, by Salmon,
1816; and for scarifiers, chaff-cutters, turnip-slicers, and
food-crushers.[516] But the great innovation was the threshing machine
of Meikle. Like most inventions, it had forerunners. The first
threshing machine is mentioned in the _Select Transactions of the
Society of Improvers in the Knowledge of Agriculture in Scotland_,
published in 1743 by Maxwell. It was invented by Michael Menzies, and
by it one man could do the work of six. One machine was worked by a
great water-wheel and triddles, another by a little wheel of 3 feet
diameter, moved by a small quantity of water. The first attempts to
substitute horse or other power for manual in threshing were directed
to the revolution of jointed flails, which should strike the floor on
which the corn was spread, but this proved unsatisfactory, so that
rubbing the grain out of the straw by revolving cylinders was
tried,[517] Young, in his northern tour, met a Mr. Clarke at Belford
in Northumberland, who was famous for mechanics,[518] among his
inventions being a threshing machine worked by one horse, which does
not seem to have effected much. Eventually Mr. A. Meikle, of Houston
Mill near Haddington, in 1798 erected a machine the principles of
which, much modified, are those of to-day; and in 1803 Mr. Aitchison,
of Drumore in East Lothian, first applied steam to threshing. It was
some time, however, before this beneficent invention was generally
used, and when the machines were used they were usually driven by
horse--or water-power until about 1850. In 1883 Messrs. Howard, of
Bedford, adapted a sheaf-binding apparatus to the threshing machine.
With new implements came new crops; the Swede turnip was grown on some
farms in Notts just before 1800, but it is not known who introduced
it.[519] The mangel wurzel was introduced about 1780-5 by Parkyns, and
prickly comfrey in 1811.
The year 1795 was one of great scarcity owing to the wet and stormy
summer, and in August wheat went up to 108s. a quarter.[520] As usual
many other causes but the right one were put forth, and the old
accusations of monopoly, forestalling, and regrating were heard again.
The war with France, with more reason, was considered to have helped
in raising prices, but the chief cause was the bad season. The members
of both Houses of Parliament bound themselves to reduce the
consumption of bread in their homes by one-third, and recommended
others to a similar reduction. It was a period of terrible distress
for the agricultural labourer. His wages were about 9s. a week, and it
was impossible for him to live on them, so that what is known as 'the
allowance system' came in. At Speenhamland in Berkshire, in this year,
the magistrates agreed that it was not expedient to help the labourer
by regulating his wages according to the statute of Elizabeth, but
recommended the farmers to increase their pay in proportion to the
present price of provisions, and they also granted relief to all poor
and industrious men according to the price of bread. They were merely
giving effect to Gilbert's Act of 1782, which legalized the
supplementing of the wages of able-bodied men from the rates, and the
decision was nicknamed the 'Speenhamland Act' because it was so
generally followed. However well meant, the effect was most
demoralizing and the English labourer, already too prone to look to
the State for help, was induced to depend less on his own exertions.
The real remedy would have been a substantial increase of his scanty
wages. As it was, landowner and farmer were often paying the labourer
in rates money that would far better have come to him in wages, and
the rates in some districts became so burdensome that land was thrown
out of cultivation. In the same year as the Speenhamland Act the
statute 36 Geo. III, c. 23, forbade the removal of persons from any
parish until they were in actual need of support; but although the law
was thus relaxed, the fixed principle which caused the refusal of all
permanent relief to labourers who had no settlement in the parish
acted as a very efficient check on migration, though, as we have seen,
it did not entirely check it. In 1796 the question of regulating the
labourers' wages by Parliament was raised; but Pitt, remembering such
schemes had always failed, was hostile, and the matter dropped.[521]
In the same year Eden made his inquiries concerning the rate of wages
and the cost of living. In Bedford, he found the agricultural labourer
was getting 1s. 2d. a day and beer, with extras in harvest[522]; but
bacon was 10d. a lb. and wheat 12s. a bushel. However, parish
allowances were liberal, a man, his wife, and four children sometimes
receiving 11s. a week from that source.
In Cumberland the labourer was being paid 10d. to 1s. a day with food,
or 1s. 6d. to 1s. 8d. without; in Hertfordshire, 1s. 6d. a day; in
Suffolk, 1s. 4d. a day and beer.
Nearly everywhere his expenditure was much in excess of his earnings,
the yearly budgets of fifty-three families in twelve different
counties showed generally large annual deficiencies, amounting in one
case to £21 18s. 4d. In one case in Lindsey, where the deficiency was
small, the family lived on bread alone. The factory system, too, had
already deprived the labourer of many of his by-industries, and thus
helped the pauperism for which landlord and farmer had to pay in
rates.
About 1788 Sir William Young proposed to send the unemployed labourers
round to the parishioners to get work, their wages being paid by their
employers and by the parish. This method of obtaining work was known
as the 'roundsman system'.[523]
Landlords, however, and farmers were profiting greatly by the high
prices, which fortunately received a check by the abundant harvest of
1796, which, with large imports,[524] caused the price of wheat to
fall to 57s. 3d., and in 1798 to 47s. 10d. It is difficult to conceive
what instability, speculation, and disaster such fluctuations must
have led to. In 1797 the Bank Restriction Act was passed, suspending
cash payments, and thereby causing a huge growth in credit
transactions, a great factor in the inflated prosperity of this
period. In January, 1799, wool was 2s. a lb., and prices at
Smithfield:
s. d. s. d.
Beef, per stone of 8 lb. 3 0 to 3 4
Mutton " " 3 0 " 4 2
Pork " " 2 8 " 3 8
The summer of that year was uninterruptedly wet; some corn in the
north was uncut in November, so that wheat went up to 94s. 2d., and in
June, 1800, was 134s. 5d., the scarcity being aggravated by the
Russian Government laying an embargo on British shipping.[525] Yet
Pitt denied that the high prices were due to the war.[526] They were
due, indeed, to several causes:
1. Frequent years of scarcity.
2. Increase of consumption, owing to the great growth of
the manufacturing population, England during the war having
almost a monopoly of the trade of Europe.
3. Napoleon's obstructions to importation.
4. The unprecedented fall of foreign exchanges.
5. The rise in the price of labour, scanty as it was.
6. Suspension of cash payments, which produced a medium
of circulation of an unlimited nature, and led to speculation.[527]
In March, 1801, wheat was 156s.; beef at Smithfield, 5s. to 6s. 6d. a
stone; and mutton, 6s. 6d. to 8s. A rise in wages was allowed on all
sides to be imperative, but the labourer even now got on an average
little more than 9s. a week,[528] a very inadequate pittance, though
generally supplemented by the parish. Arthur Young[529] tells of a
person living near Bury in 1801, who, before the era of high prices,
earned 5s. a week, and with that could purchase:
A bushel of wheat.
" malt.
1 lb. of butter.
1 lb. of cheese.
A pennyworth of tobacco.
But in 1801 the same articles cost him:
s. d.
A bushel of wheat 16 0
" malt 9 0
1 lb. of butter 1 0
1 lb. of cheese 4
Tobacco 1
--------
£1 6 5
========
His wages were now 9s., and his allowance from the rates 6s., so that
there was a deficiency of 11s. 5d.
The increase in the cost of living in the last thirty years is
further illustrated by the following table:
1773. 1793. 1799. 1800.
£ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d.
Coomb of malt 12 0 1 3 0 1 3 0 2 0 0
Chaldron of coals 1 11 6 2 0 6 2 6 0 2 11 0
Coomb of oats 5 0 13 0 16 0 1 1 0
Load of hay 2 2 0 4 10 0 5 5 0 7 0 0
Meat, per lb. 4 5 7 9
Butter, " 6 11 11 1 4
Loaf sugar, per lb. 8 1 0 1 3 1 4
Poor rates, in the £ 1 0 2 6 3 0 5 0
It was again proposed by Mr. Whitbread in the House of Commons that
wages should be regulated by the price of provisions, and a minimum
wage fixed; but there was enough sense in the House to reject this
return to obsolete methods.
After March, 1801, prices commenced to fall, owing to a favourable
season and the reopening of the Baltic ports, which allowed imports to
come in more freely, for most of our foreign corn at this time came
from Germany and Denmark. At the end of the year wheat averaged 75s.
6d., and with fair seasons it came down in the beginning of 1804 to
49s. 6d. Beef at Smithfield was from 4s. to 5s. 4d. a stone, mutton
from 4s. to 4s. 6d.[530] This great drop in prices was accompanied by
an increase in wages, the labourer from 1804 to 1810 getting on an
average 12s. a week[531]; the cost of implements rose, so did the rate
of interest, and the cry of agricultural distress in 1804 was heard
everywhere. More protection was demanded by those interested in the
land, and accordingly a duty of 24s. 3d. was imposed when the price
was 63s. or under; a bounty was paid on export when it was 40s. or
under; and wheat might be exported without bounty up to 54s.
However, 1804 was a very deficient harvest, owing to blight and
mildew, and by the end of the year wheat was 86s. 2d. The harvests
till 1808 were not as bad as that of 1804, but not good enough to
lower the prices. Also, owing to the Berlin and Milan Decrees of
Napoleon and the Non-intercourse Act of the United States of America,
imports were restricted so that at the end of 1808 wheat was 92s. In
this year the exports of wheat exceeded the imports, but it was due to
the requirements of our army in Spain; and 1789 was the last year when
exports were greater under normal circumstances.[532] 1809 was a bad
harvest, so was 1810; in the former rot being very prevalent among
sheep; and by August, 1810, hay was £11 a load and wheat 116s., only
large imports (1,567,126 quarters) preventing a famine. Down wool was
2s. 1d. per lb., beef and mutton 8-1/2d., cheese 8d.[533]
In 1811 the whole of July and part of August were wet and cold; and
in August, 1812, wheat averaged 155s., the finest Dantzic selling at
Mark Lane for 180s., and oats reached 84s. As our imports of corn then
chiefly came from the north-west of Europe, which has a climate very
similar to our own, crops there were often deficient from bad seasons
in the same years as our own, and the price consequently high. On the
other hand, it is a proof that produce will find the best market
regardless of hindrances, that much of our corn at this time came from
France. Corn in 1813 was seized on with such avidity that there was no
need to show samples. As high prices had now prevailed for some time
and were still rising, landlords and farmers jumped to the conclusion
that they would be permanent; so that this is the period when rents
experienced their greatest increase, in some cases having increased
fivefold since 1790, and speculations in land were most general. Land
sold for forty years' purchase, many men of spirit and adventure very
different from farmers 'were tempted to risk their property in
agricultural speculations',[534] and large sums were sunk in lands and
improvements in the spirit of mercantile enterprise. The land was
considered as a kind of manufacturing establishment, and 'such powers
of capital and labour were applied as forced almost sterility itself
to become fertile.' Even good pastures were ploughed up to grow wheat
at a guinea a bushel, and much worthless land was sown with corn.
Manure was procured from the most remote quarters, and we are told a
new science rose up, agricultural chemistry, which, 'with much
frivolity and many refinements remote from common sense, was not
without great operation on the productive powers of land.'
Land jobbing and speculation became general, and credit came to the
aid of capital. The larger farmers, as we have seen, were before the
war inclined to an extravagance that amazed their older
contemporaries; now we are told, some insisted on being called
esquire, and some kept liveried servants.[535]
It is somewhat curious to learn that one of the drawbacks from which
farmers suffered at this time was the ravages of pigeons, which seem
to have been as numerous as in the Middle Ages, when the lord's
dovecote was the scourge of the villein's crops. In 1813 there was
said to be 20,000 pigeon houses in England and Wales, each on an
average containing 100 pairs of old pigeons.[536]
Another pest was the large number of 'vermin', whose destruction had
long before been considered important enough to demand the attention
of the legislature.[537] Some parishes devoted large portions of their
funds to this object; in 1786 East Budleigh in Devonshire, out of a
total receipt of £20 1s. 8-1/2d., voted £5 10s. for vermin killing.
That now sacred animal the fox was then treated with scant respect,
farmers and landlords paying for his destruction as 'vermin'[538]; the
parish accounts of Ashburton in Devonshire, for instance, from
1761-1820 include payments for killing 18 foxes and 4 vixens, with no
less than 153 badgers.
But the edifice of artificial prosperity was already tottering. After
1812 prices fell steadily,[539] the abundant harvest of 1813 and the
opening of the continental ports accelerated this, and by December,
1813, wheat was 73s. 3d. Yet agriculture had made solid progress. The
Committee of the House of Commons which inquired into the state of the
corn trade in 1813 stated that through the extension of, and
improvements in, agriculture the agricultural produce of the kingdom
had increased one-fourth in the preceding ten years.[540] The high
prices had attracted a large amount of capital to the land, so that
there was very rapid and extensive progress, the methods of tillage
were improved, large tracts of inferior pasture converted into arable,
much, however, of which was soon to revert to weeds; there were many
enclosures, and many fens, commons, and wastes reclaimed. But there
was a reverse side to this picture of prosperity, even in the case of
landlord and farmer. The burden of taxation was crushing; a
contemporary writer, a farmer of twenty-five years standing,[541]
wrote that, with the land tax remaining the same, there was a high
property tax, house and window taxes were doubled, poor rates in some
places trebled, highway, church, and constable rates doubled and
trebled, and there were oppressive taxes on malt and horses, both nags
and farm animals. A man renting a farm at £70 and keeping two
farm-horses, a nag, and a dog, would pay taxes for them of £5 0s. 6d.,
a fourteenth of his rent.[542] Indeed, poor rates of 16s. and 20s. in
the £ were known,[543] and they were occasionally more than the whole
rent received by the landlord forty years before. A Devonshire
landowner complained that seven-sixteenths out of the annual value of
every estate in the county was taken from owners and occupiers in
direct taxes.[544] And the Committee on Agricultural Depression of
1822 asserted that during the war taxes and rates were quadrupled.[545]
Blacksmiths, whitesmiths, collar makers, ropers, carpenters, and many
other tradesmen with whom the farmer dealt, raised their prices
threefold; and it was openly asserted that the high prices of grain
and stock were not proportionate to the increase of other prices. Much
of the grass land broken up in the earlier years of the war was before
the close in a miserable condition, for it was cropped year after year
without manure, and was worn out. On the whole it may be doubted if
the bulk of the farmers of England made large profits during the war;
many no doubt profited by the extraordinary fluctuations in prices,
and it was those men who 'kept liveried servants'; but there must have
been many who lost heavily by the same means, and the rise of rent,
taxes, rates, labour, and tradesmen's prices largely discounted the
prices of corn and stock. The landowners at this period have generally
been described as flourishing at the expense of the community, but
their increased rents were greatly neutralized by the weight of
taxation and the general rise in prices. A contemporary writer says
that owing to the heavy taxes, even in the war time, he 'often had not
a shilling at the end of the year.'[546]
The following accounts, drawn up in 1805,[547] do not show that
farmers were making much money with wheat at 10s. a bushel:
Account of the culture of an acre of wheat on good fallow land:
Dr. £ s. d.
Two years' rent 2 0 0
Hauling dung from fold 10 0
Four ploughings 2 0 0
Two harrowings 4 0
Lime 1 18 0
Seed, 2-1/2 bushels 1 5 0
Reaping 5 0
Threshing 10 0
Wages 5 0
Tithes and taxes 15 0
--------
£9 12 0
========
Cr. £ s. d.
20 bushels of wheat at 10s 10 0 0
The straw was set against
the value of the dung.
The tailend wheat was
Eaten by the family!
---------
£10 0 0
=========
And on a farm on good land in the same county the following would be
the annual balance sheet at the same date:
Dr. £ s. d.
Rent 200 0 0
Tithes 40 0 0
Wages 58 0 0
Extra harvestmen 7 0 0
Tradesmen's bills 50 0 0
Taxes and rates 58 0 0
Malt, hops, and cider 60 0 0
Lime 20 0 0
Hop poles 10 0 0
Expenses at fairs and markets 8 0 0
Clothing, groceries, &c., for the family 45 0 0
Interest on £1,500 capital, at 5 per cent. 75 0 0
Sundries 15 0 0
----------
£646 0 0
==========
Cr. £ s. d.
360 bushels of wheat, @ 10 s. 180 0 0
300 bushels of barley, @ 6s. 90 0 0
100 bushels of peas, @ 6s. 30 0 0
20 cwt. hops 60 0 0
Sale of oxen, cows and calves 150 0 0
Profits from sheep 100 0 0
" from pigs, poultry, dairy, and sundries 50 0 0
----------
£660 0 0
==========
According to this the farmer did little more than pay rent, interest
on capital, and get a living. Yet prices of what he had to sell had
gone up greatly: wheat in Herefordshire in 1760 was 3s. a bushel, in
1805, 10s.; butcher's meat in 1760 was 1-1/2d. a lb., in 1804, 7d.;
fresh butter 4-1/2d. in 1760, 1s. 3d. in 1804; a fat goose in Hereford
market in 1740, 10d.; 1760, 1s.; 1804, 4s.; a couple of fowls in 1740,
6d.; 1760, 7d.; 1804, 2s. 4d.[548] The winter of 1813-4 was
extraordinarily severe, and the wheat crop was seriously injured, but
the increased breadth of cultivation, a large surplus, and great
importations kept the price down. Many sheep, however, were killed by
the hard winter, which also reduced the quality of the cattle, so that
meat was higher in 1814 than at any previous period.[549] At
Smithfield beef was 6s. to 7s. a stone, mutton 7s. to 8s. 6d. With the
peace of 1814 the fictitious prosperity came to an end, a large amount
of paper was withdrawn from circulation, which lowered the price of
all commodities, and a large number of country banks failed. The first
sufferers were the agricultural classes, who happened at that time to
hold larger supplies than usual, the value of which fell at once; the
incomes of all were diminished, and the capital of many
annihilated.[550] At the same time the demand for our manufactures
from abroad fell off; the towns were impoverished, and bought less
from the farmer.
The short period of war in 1815 had little effect on prices, and in
January, 1816, wheat was 52s. 6d., and the prices of live stock had
fallen considerably. In 1815 protection reached its highest limit, the
Act of that year prohibiting import of wheat when the price was under
80s. a quarter, and other grain in proportion.[551] However, it was of
no avail; and in the beginning of 1816 the complaints of agricultural
distress were so loud and deep that the Board of Agriculture issued
circular letters to every part of the kingdom, asking for information
on the state of agriculture.
According to the answers given, rent had already fallen on an average
25 per cent. and agriculture was in a 'deplorable state.'[552]
Bankruptcies, seizures, executions, imprisonments, were rife, many
farmers had become parish paupers. Rent was much in arrear, tithes and
poor rates unpaid, improvements generally discontinued, live stock
diminished; alarming gangs of poachers and other depredators ranged
the country. The loss was greater on arable than on grass land, and
'flock farms' had suffered less than others, though they had begun to
feel it heavily.
All classes connected with the land suffered severely; the landlords
could not get many of their rents; the farmer's stock had depreciated
40 per cent.[553]; many labourers, who during the war had been getting
from 15s. to 16s. a week and 18s. in summer,[554] were walking the
country searching for employment. Many tenants threw up their farms,
and it was often noticed that landlords, 'knowing very little of
agriculture and taken by surprise,' could not manage the farms thrown
on their hands, and they went uncultivated. Some farmers paid up their
rent to date, sold their stock, and went off without any notice;
others, less scrupulous, drove off their stock and moved their
household furniture in the night without settling.[555]
Farmers and landowners were asked to state the remedies required. Some
asked for more rent reduction and further prohibition of import, but
the most general cry was for the lessening of taxation.
A Herefordshire farmer[556] stated that in 1815 the taxes on a farm of
300 acres in that county were:
£ s. d.
Property tax, landlord and tenant 95 16 10
Great tithes 64 17 6
Lesser tithes 29 15 0
Land tax 14 0 0
Window lights 24 1 6
Poor rates, landlord 10 0 0
" tenant 40 0 0
Cart-horse duty, landlord, 3 horses 2 11 0
Two saddle horses, landlord 9 0 0
Gig 6 6 0
Cart-horse duty,[557] tenant 7 2 0
One saddle horse, tenant 2 13 6
Landlord's malt duty on 60 bushels of barley 21 0 0
Tenant's duty for making 120 bushels of
barley into malt 42 0 0
New rate for building shire hall, paid by landlord 9 0 0
" " " tenant 3 0 0
Surcharge 2 8 0
------------
£383 11 4
============
The parish of Kentchurch, in Herefordshire, paid in direct taxes a
greater sum than the lands of the whole parish could be let for.
Another very general complaint was of the collection of tithe in kind,
a most awkward and offensive method, causing great expense and waste,
which, however, had given way in many places to compounding.
Such is the picture of agriculture after twenty years of high prices
and protection.[558] One may naturally ask, if much money had been
made by farmers during these years, where had it all gone to that they
were reduced at the first breath of adversity to such straits? Some
allowance must be made for the fact that these accounts come from
those interested in the land, who were always ready to make the most
of misfortune with a view to further protection, and the farmer is a
notorious grumbler. It seems, however, that most landlords and tenants
believed that the high prices would last for ever, and lived
accordingly, and, as we have seen, many made no profit at all because
of their increased burdens. As a matter of fact, both were grumbling
because prices had come back to their natural level after an unnatural
inflation.[559]
Hemp at this date was still grown in Lincolnshire and Somerset, and
Marshall tells us that in 1803 there was a considerable quantity of
hemp grown in Shropshire.[560] In that county there was a small plot
of ground, called 'the hemp-yard,' appendant to almost every
farm-house and to many of the best sort of cottages. Whenever a
cottager had 10 or 15 perches of land to his cottage, worth from 1s.
6d. to 2s. 6d. a year, with the aid of his wife's industry it enabled
him to pay his rent. A peck of hempseed, costing 2s., sowed about 10
perches of land, and this produced from 24 to 36 lb. of tow when
dressed and fit for spinning. A dozen pounds of tow made 10 ells of
cloth, worth generally about 3s. an ell. Thus a good crop on 10
perches of land brought in £4 10s. 0d., half of which was nett profit.
The hemp was pulled a little before harvest, and immediately spread on
grass land, where it lay for a month or six weeks. The more rain there
was the sooner it was ready to take off the grass. When the rind
peeled easily from the woody part, it was, on a dry day, taken into
the house, and when harvest was over well dried in fine weather and
dressed, being then fit for the tow dresser, who prepared it for
spinning. After the crop of hemp the land was sown with turnips, a
valuable resource for the winter.
Since 1815 little hemp or flax has been grown in England[561]; in 1907
there were, according to the Agricultural Returns, 355 acres of flax
grown in England, and hemp was not mentioned.
FOOTNOTES:
[504] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1896, p. 1, and 1898, p. 1.
[505] _Autobiography_, p. 242.
[506] Eden, _State of the Poor_, i. 18.
[507] 'Had his industry been under the direction of a better
judgement, he would have been an admirable president.'--Young,
_Autobiography_, p. 316.
[508] _The Report of the Committee on Waste Lands_, 1795, estimated
wastes and commons at 7,800,000 acres, p. 221.
[509] The Merino was largely imported into England by the efforts of
George III, and a Merino Society was formed in 1811; but many
circumstances made it of such little profit to cultivate it in
preference to native breeds, that it was diverted to
Australia.--Burnley, _History of Wool_, p. 17.
[510] The first, the Bath and West of England, was established in
1777.
[511] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1899, p. 7.
[512] Higher prices had been realized for the improved Longhorns; in
1791, at the sale of Mr. Fowler of Little Rollright, Sultan a
two-year-old bull fetched 210 guineas, and a cow 260 guineas; and at
Mr. Paget's sale in 1793, a bull of the same breed sold for 400
guineas.--_Culley on Live Stock_, p. 59.
[513] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1899, p. 28.
[514] _Culley on Live Stock_ (1807), pp. 46-7.
[515] _Culley on Live Stock_, p. vi.
[516] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1892, p. 27.
[517] Morton, _Cyclopaedia of Agriculture_, ii. 964.
[518] _Northern Tour_, iii. 49. Clarke also experimented on the effect
of electricity on vegetables, electrifying turnips in boxes with the
result that growth was quickened and weight increased.
[519] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1896, p, 93.
[520] Tooke, _History of Prices_, p. 182.
[521] _Autobiography of A. Young_, p. 256.
[522] _State of the Poor_, i. 565 et seq.; Thorold Rogers, _Work and
Wages_, p. 487. It is difficult to calculate the exact income of the
labourer; besides extras in harvest, and relief from the parish, he
might have a small holding, or common rights, also payments in kind
and the earnings of his wife and children.
[523] Hasbach, _op. cit._ p. 181; Eden, _op. cit._ li. 27.
[524] Imports of wheat and flour in 1796 were 879,200 quarters.
[525] Yet imports were comparatively large; 1,264,520 quarters of
wheat, against 463,185 quarters in 1799.
[526] Tooke, _History of Prices_, p. 219.
[527] _Farmer's Magazine_, 1817, p. 60.
[528] Thorold Rogers, _Work and Wages_, c. 18.
[529] _Annals of Agriculture_, xxxvii. 265. In 1805, in Herefordshire,
the labourer was getting about 6s. 6d. a week--See Duncumb, _General
View of Agriculture of Herefordshire_. Those who lived in the
farm-house often fared best: in 1808 the diet of a Hampshire farm
servant was, for breakfast, bacon, bread, and skim milk; for lunch,
bread and cheese and small beer; for dinner, between 3 p.m. and 4
p.m., pickled pork or bacon with potatoes, cabbages, turnips, or
greens, and broths of wheat-flour and garden stuff. Supper consisted
of bread and cheese and a pint of ale. His bread was usually made of
wheat, which, considering the price, is remarkable. On Sundays he had
fresh meat. The farmers lived in many cases little better; a statement
which must be compared with others ascribing great extravagance to
them.--Vancouver, _General View of the Agriculture of Hants_ (1808),
p. 383.
[530] Tooke, _History of Prices_, i. 236.
[531] Thorold Rogers, _Work and Wages_, c. 18. In many cases he was
getting 15s. and 16s. a week all the year round. The Parliamentary
Committee of 1822 put his wages during the war at from 15s. to 16s. a
week. _Parliamentary Reports Committees_, v. 72; but it is difficult
to say how much he received as wages, and how much as parish relief.
Recruiting for the war helped to raise wages, as did the increased
growth of corn.
[532] McCulloch, _Commercial Dictionary_ (1847), p. 438. See Appendix,
ii.
[533] Tooke, i. 319, and _Pamphleteer_, vi. 200 (A. Young). Since
1770, says the latter, labour by 1810-11 had doubled, but meat had
risen 146 per cent., cheese 153 per cent., bread 100 per cent. Wages
therefore had not risen in proportion to prices.
[534] _Inquiry into Agricultural Distress_ (1822), p. 38.
[535] _Thoughts on Present Depressed State of Agricultural Industry_
(1817), p. 6.
[536] Vancouver, _General View of the Agriculture of Devon_, p. 357.
[537] See 14 Eliz., c. 11, and 39 Eliz., c. 18.
[538] _Transactions of the Devon Association_, xxix. 291-349.
[539] Average annual prices of wheat were: 1812, 126s. 6d.; 1813,
109s. 9d.; 1814, 74s. 4d.; 1815, 65s. 7d.
[540] Porter, _Progress of the Nation_, p. 149.
[541] _A Defence of the Farmers and Landowners of Great Britain_
(1814), p. 49.
[542] Ibid. p. x.
[543] Ibid. p. 7.
[544] _Agricultural State of the Kingdom_, p. 67.
[545] _Parliamentary Reports (Committees)_, v. 72.
[546] _Thoughts on the Present Depressed State of the Agricultural
Interest_ (1817), p. 4.
[547] Duncumb, _General View of the Agriculture of Hereford_, 1805.
The writer of _A Defence of the Farmers and Landowners of Great
Britain_ (1814) puts the average crop of wheat in the United Kingdom
at 15 or 16 bushels an acre, p. 28. A very low estimate.
[548] Duncumb, _General View of the Agriculture of Hereford_, p. 140.
[549] Tooke, _History of Prices_, ii. 4.
[550] _Farmer's Magazine_ (1817), p. 69.
[551] The duties were often evaded by smuggling; coasting vessels met
the foreign corn ships at sea, received their cargoes, and landed them
so as to escape the duty.
[552] _Agricultural State of the Kingdom_, p. 5.
[553] _Observations for the Use of Landed Gentlemen_ (1817), p. 7.
[554] _Defence of the Farmers, &c._ (1814); and _Parliamentary
Reports_, v. 72.
[555] _Agricultural State of the Kingdom_, p. 64.
[556] Ibid. p. 105.
[557] The agricultural horse tax was repealed in 1821, the tax on
ponies and mules in 1823.
[558] There were some exceptions, but the overwhelming majority of
replies to the letters were couched in the above spirit.
[559] At a time when landlords formed the majority in Parliament, it
is curious to find a substantial farmer asserting that 'the landed
interest has been, since the corn law of 1773, held in a state of
complete vassalage to the commercial and manufacturing, and the
farmers of the country in a state very little superior to that of
Polish peasants.'
[560] _Review of Western Department_, pp. 249, 250.
[561] Morton, _Cyclopaedia of Agriculture_, ii. 26.
CHAPTER XVIII
ENCLOSURE--THE SMALL OWNER
The war period was one of great activity in enclosure; from 1798 to
1810 there were 956 Bills; from 1811-20, 771.[562]
It must be remembered, however, that the number of Acts is not a
conclusive test of the amount of enclosure, as there was a large
amount that was non-parliamentary: by the principal landlord, and by
freeholders who agreed to amicable changes and transfer, as at
Pickering, in Yorkshire.[563] Roughly speaking, about one-third of the
Acts were for enclosing commonable waste, the rest for enclosing open
and commonable fields and lands.[564] Owing to the expense an Act was
only obtained in the last resource. It was also because of the
expense[565] that many landlords desirous to enclose were unable to do
so, and therefore devoted their attention to the improvement of the
common fields. That agriculture benefited by enclosure there is no
possible doubt, but it was attended with great hardships. The
landowner generally gained, for his rents increased largely. In
twenty-three parishes of Lincolnshire, for instance, his rents doubled
on enclosure. But the expenses were so heavy that his gain was often
very small, and sometimes he was a loser by the process. As for the
farmers, the poorer ones suffered, for more capital was needed for
enclosed lands, and the process generally was so slow, taking from
two to six years before the final award was given, that many farmers
were thrown out in the management of their farms, for they did not
know where their future lands would be allotted. That the poor
suffered greatly is indubitable: 'By nineteen Enclosure Acts out of
twenty the poor are injured, in some cases grossly injured,' wrote
Young in 1801.[566] In the Acts it was endeavoured to treat them
fairly,[567] and allotments were made to them, or money paid on
enclosure in lieu of their rights of common, or small plots of land;
but the expense of enclosing small allotments was proportionately very
great, generally too great, and they had to be sold, while the sums of
money were often spent in the alehouse. The results of sixty-eight
Acts were investigated in the eastern counties, with the result that
in all but fifteen the poor were injured. It was generally found that
they had lost their cows.
Its effect on the smallholder is well described by Davis in his
_Report on Wilts_.[568] There, before enclosure, the tenants usually
occupied yard-lands consisting of a homestead, 2 acres of meadow, 18
acres of arable, generally in eighteen or twenty strips, with a right
on the common meadows, common fields and downs for 40 sheep, and as
many cattle as the tenant could winter with the fodder he grew. The 40
sheep were kept by a common shepherd with the common herd, were taken
every day to the downs and brought back every night to be folded on
the arable fields, the rule being to fold 1,000 sheep on a 'tenantry'
acre (three-quarters of a statute acre) every night.[569] In breeding
sheep regard was had to 'folding quality,' i.e. the propensity to
drop manure only after being folded at night, as much as to quality
and quantity of wool and meat. On enclosure the common flock was
broken up. The small farmer had no longer any common to turn his
horses on. The down on which he fed his sheep was largely curtailed,
the common shepherd was abolished, and the farmer had too few sheep to
enable him individually to employ a shepherd. Therefore he had to part
with his flock. Having no cow common and very little pasture land he
could not keep cows. In such circumstances the small farmer, after a
few years, succumbed and became a labourer, or emigrated, or went to
the towns.
In a pamphlet called _The Case of Labourers in Husbandry_, 1795, the
Rev. David Davies said, 'by enclosure an amazing number of people have
been reduced from a comfortable state of partial independence to the
precarious condition of mere hirelings, who when out of work
immediately come on the parish.' It has often been said that the poor
were robbed of their share in the land by the landowners; but as a
matter of fact it was the expense of securing the compensation allowed
them, much greater in proportion on small holdings than on large,
which went into the pockets of surveyors and lawyers, that did this.
It was also often through the farmer that the labourer was deprived of
his land when he had retained an acre or two after enclosure. Wishing
to make the labourer dependent on him, he persuaded the agent to let
the cottages with the farm, and the agent in order to avoid collecting
a number of small rents consented. As soon as the farmer had the
cottages he took the land from them and added it to his own. The
peasant's losses engaged the serious attention of many landlords; near
Tewkesbury, in 1773, the lord of the manor on enclosure, besides
reserving 25 acres for the use of the poor, allowed land to each
cottage sufficient to keep a horse or a cow, often added a small
building, and gave stocks for raising orchards. Even some of the
idlest were thereby made industrious, poor rates sank to 4d. in the £,
though the population increased, and the labourer always had for sale
some poultry, or the produce of his cow, or some fruit.[570]
In 1800 the Board of Agriculture, composed almost entirely of
landowners, noticing that the poor of Rutland and Lincolnshire, who
had land for one or two cows and some potatoes, had not applied for
poor relief, offered a gold medal for the most satisfactory account of
the best means of supporting cows on poor land, in a method applicable
to cottagers.[571] Young recommended that in the case of extensive
wastes every cottage on enclosure should be secured sufficient land on
which to keep a cow, the land to be inalienable from the cottage and
the ownership vested in the parish.
Lord Winchelsea[572] urged that a good garden should always go with a
cottage, and set the example himself, one which has been generally
followed in England by the greater landlords with much success. As may
be imagined, these schemes or others similar to them were put into
effect by the conscientious and energetic, but not by the apathetic
and careless. Further, an Act was passed in the fifty-ninth year of
George III, which enabled parishes to lease or buy 20 acres of land
for the employment of their poor.
In many cases, it must be allowed, the grazing of the commons was
often worth very little. Let one man, it was said in 1795, put a cow
on a common in spring for nothing, and let another pay a farmer 1s.
6d. a week to keep a cow of equal value on enclosed land. When both
are driven to market at Michaelmas the extra weight of the latter will
more than repay the cost of the keep, while her flow of milk meanwhile
has been much superior.
The Committee on Waste Lands of 1795 attributed the great increase in
the weight of cattle not only to the improved methods of breeding, but
to their being fed on good enclosed lands instead of wastes and
commons.[573] Even when commons were stinted they were in general
overstocked, while disease was always being spread with enormous loss
to the commoners. The larger holders, too, who had common rights,
often crowded out the smaller.
There were often, as we have seen, a large number of 'squatters' on
commons who had seized and occupied land without any legal title. As a
rule, if these people had been in possession twenty-one years their
title was respected; if not, no regard was very justly paid to them on
enclosure, and they were deprived of what they had seized.
Eden wrote when enclosure was at its height; he was a competent and
accurate observer, and this is his picture of the 'commoner':[574]
'The advantages which cottagers and poor people derive from commons
and wastes are rather apparent than real; instead of sticking
regularly to labour they waste their time in picking up a few dry
sticks or in grubbing on some bleak moor. Their starved pig or two,
together with a few wandering goslings, besides involving them in
perpetual altercations with their neighbours, are dearly paid for in
care, time, and bought food. There are thousands and thousands of
acres in the kingdom, now the sorry pastures of geese, hogs, asses,
half-grown horses, and half-starved cattle, which want but to be
enclosed to be as rich as any land now in tillage.'
Enclosure worked an important social revolution. Before it the
entirely landless labourer was rare: he nearly always had some holding
in the common field or a right on the common pasture. With enclosure
his holding or right had generally disappeared, and he deteriorated
socially. It was very unfortunate, too, that when enclosure was most
active domestic industries, such as weaving, decayed, and deprived the
labourer and his family of a badly needed addition to his scanty
income.
In its physical and moral effects the system of domestic manufactures
was immensely preferable to that of the crowded factory, while
economically it enabled the tillers of the soil to exist on farms
which could not support them by agriculture alone.
This uprooting of a great part of the agricultural population from the
soil by irresistible economic causes brought with it grave moral
evils, and created divisions and antagonisms of interest from which we
are suffering to-day.[575] If some such scheme as that of Arthur Young
or Lord Winchelsea had been universally adopted, this blot on an
inevitable movement might have been removed, and a healthy rural
population planted on English soil. Another result followed, the
labourer no longer boarded as a rule in his employer's house, where
the farmer worked and lived with his men; the tie of mutual interest
was loosened, and he worked for this or that master indifferently. One
advantage, however, arose, in that, having to find a home of his own,
he married early, but this was vitiated by his knowledge that the
parish would support his children, on which knowledge he was induced
to rely.
On the other hand, the farmer often rose in the social scale. With
the abandonment of the handicaps and restrictions of the common-field
system the efficient came more speedily to the front. It was they who
had amassed capital, and capital was now needed more than ever, so
they added field to field, and consolidated holdings.
The Act of 1845 did away with the necessity for private Enclosure
Acts, still further reducing the expense; and since that date there
have been 80,000 or 90,000 acres of common arable fields and meadows
enclosed without parliamentary sanction, and 139,517 acres of the same
have been enclosed with it,[576] besides many acres of commons and
waste.
In the _Report of the Committee of Enclosures_ of 1844,[577] there is
a curious description of the way in which common fields were sometimes
allotted. There were in some open fields, lands called 'panes',
containing forty or sixty different lands, and on a certain day the
best man of the parish appeared to take possession of any lot he
thought fit. If his right was called in question there was a fight for
it, and the survivor took the first lot, and so they went on through
the parish. There was also the old 'lot meadow' in which the owners
drew lots for choice of portions. On some of the grazing lands the
right of grazing sheep belonged to a man called a 'flockmaster', who
during certain months of the year had the exclusive right of turning
his sheep on all the lands of the parish.
Closely connected with the subject of enclosure is that of the partial
disappearance of the small owner, both the yeoman who farmed his own
little estate and the peasant proprietor. We have noticed above[578]
Gregory King's statement as to the number of small freeholders in
England in 1688, no less than 160,000, or with their families about
one-seventh of the population of the country. This date, that of the
Revolution, marks an epoch in their history, for from that time they
began to diminish in proportion to the population. Their number in
1688 is a sufficient answer to the exaggerated statement of
contemporaries in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries as to the
depopulation caused by enclosures. Chamberlayne, in his _State of
Great Britain_, published at about the same time as Gregory King's
figures, says there were more freeholders in England than in any
country of like extent in Europe: '£40 or £50 a year is very ordinary,
£100 or £200 in some counties is not rare, sometimes in Kent and in
the Weald of Sussex £500 or £600 per annum, and £3,000 or £4,000 of
stock.' In the first quarter of the eighteenth century he was a
prominent figure. Defoe[579] describes the number and prosperity of
the Greycoats of Kent (as they were called from their homespun
garments), 'whose interest is so considerable that whoever they vote
for is always sure to carry it.'
Why has this sturdy class so dwindled in numbers, and left England
infinitely the weaker for their decrease? The causes are several;
social, economic, and political. The chief, perhaps, is the peculiar
form of Government which came in with the Revolution. The landed
gentry by that event became supreme, the national and local
administration was entirely in their hands, and land being the
foundation of social and political influence was eagerly sought by
them where it was not already in their hands.[580] At the same time
the successful business men, whose numbers now increased rapidly from
the development of trade, bought land to 'make themselves gentlemen'.
Both these classes bought out the yeomen, who do not seem to have been
very loath to part with their land. The recently devised system of
strict family settlements enabled the old and the new gentlemen to
keep this land in their families. The complicated title to land made
its transfer difficult and costly, so that there was little breaking
up of estates to correspond with the constant buying up of small
owners. To the smaller freeholder, as has been noticed, the enclosure
of waste land did much harm, for it was necessary to his holding.
Again, smaller arable farms did not pay as well as large ones, so they
tended to disappear. The decay of home industries was also a heavy
blow to the smaller yeoman and the peasant proprietor.
Under this combination of circumstances many of the yeomen left the
land. Yet though Young, less than a century after King and Davenant,
said that the small freeholder had practically disappeared, there were
at the end of the eighteenth century many left all over England, who
however largely disappeared during the war and in the bad times after
the war.[581] But a contrary tendency was at work which helped to
replenish the class. The desire of the Englishman for land is not
confined to the wealthy classes. At the end of the eighteenth century
men who had made small fortunes in trade were buying small properties
and taking the place of the yeomen.[582] In the great French War of
1793-1815, many yeomen, attracted by the high prices of land, sold
their properties, but at the same time many farmers, attracted by the
high prices of produce, which had often enriched them, bought
land.[583] During the 'good times' of 1853-75 many small holders, like
those of Axholme, noticed in the _Report_ of the Agricultural
Commission of 1893, bought land.
A new class of small owners also has sprung up, who, dwelling in or
near towns and railway stations, have bought small freeholds. The
return of the owners of land of 1872-6 gave the following numbers of
those owning land in England and Wales[584]:
Total number of owners of: Number. Acreage.
less than one acre 703,289 151,171
1 acre and under 10 121,983 478,679
10 " 50 72,640 1,750,079
50 " 100 25,839 1,791,605
100 " 500 32,317 6,827,346
The great majority of the first class here enumerated, those owning
less than one acre, do not concern us, as they were evidently merely
houses and gardens not of an agricultural character, but a large
number of the second class and most of the other three must have been
agricultural, though unfortunately no distinction is made. It will be
seen, therefore, that there were a considerable number of small
owners in England in 1872, and their numbers have probably increased
since. Many of them, however, are of the new class mentioned above,
and there appears to be no doubt that the number of the peasant
proprietors and of the yeomen of the old sort has much diminished,
especially in proportion to the growth of population.
FOOTNOTES:
[562] Cf. supra, p. 163.
[563] R. Marshall, _Rural Economy of Yorkshire_, p. 17 et seq.
[564] Slater, _English Peasantry and Enclosure_, p. 7.
[565] It was stated in the _Report of the Committee on Enclosures_
(1844), p. 31, that the ordinary expense of obtaining an Enclosure Act
was from £1,000 to £1,500. In 1814 the enclosure of three farms,
amounting to 570 acres, including subdivision fences and money paid to
a tenant for relinquishing his agreement, cost the landlord nearly
£4,000.--_Agricultural State of the Kingdom_ (1816), p. 116.
[566] _Enquiry into the Propriety of Supplying Wastes to the better
Support of the Poor_, p. 42.
[567] The usual clause in Enclosure Acts stated that the land should
be 'allotted according to the several and respective rights of _all_
who had rights and interests' in the enclosed property, and expenses
were to be borne 'in proportion to the respective shares of the people
interested'.
[568] pp. 8 et seq. Slater, _op. cit._ p. 113.
[569] Cf. Marshall's account of the common-field townships in
Hampshire at the end of the eighteenth century. Each occupier of land
in the common fields contributed to the town flock a number of sheep
in proportion to his holding, which were placed under a shepherd who
fed them and folded them on all parts of the township. A similar
practice was observed with the common herd of cows, which were placed
under one cowherd who tended them by day and brought them back at
night to be milked, distributing them among their respective owners,
and in the morning they were collected by the sound of the
horn.--_Rural Economy of Southern Counties_, ii. 351.
[570] _Report of Committee on Waste Lands_ (1795), p. 204. Ground was
frequently left by the Acts for the erection of cottages for the poor,
and special allotments were made to Guardians for the use of the poor,
in addition to the land allotted to all according to their respective
claims. Can any one doubt that if there had been a systematic robbery
of the smaller holders on enclosure they would not have risen 'en
masse'?
[571] Slater, _op. cit._ p. 133.
[572] _Agricultural State of the Kingdom_ (1816), p. 8.
[573] _Report_, p. 204.
[574] _State of the Poor_, pp. i, xviii.
[575] Lecky, _England in the Eighteenth Century_, vi. 191.
[576] Slater, _op. cit._ p. 191.
[577] _Report_, p. 27.
[578] _See_ above. Another estimate puts them at 180,000.
[579] _Tour_, i. (2), 37, 38.
[580] Toynbee, _Industrial Revolution_, p. 62.
[581] Hasbach, _op. cit._ p. 71.
[582] Marshall, _Review of Agriculture, Reports Western Department_,
p. 18.
[583] _Parliamentary Reports, Commissioners_ (1897), xv. 32.
[584] _Parliamentary Accounts and Papers_, lxxx. 21. The number of
those owning over 500 acres does not concern the small owner or the
yeoman class, but they were: from 500 acres to 1,000, 4,799; from
1,000 to 2,000, 2,719; from 2,000 to 5,000, 1,815; from 5,000 to
10,000, 581; from 10,000 to 20,000, 223; from 20,000 to 50,000, 66;
from 50,000 to 100,000, 3; over 100,000, 1. For the numbers of the
'holdings' of various sizes in 1875 and 1907 see below, p. 334. The
term 'holdings', however, includes freeholds and leaseholds.
CHAPTER XIX
1816-1837
DEPRESSION
The summer of 1816 was wretched; the distress, aggravated by the bad
season, caused riots everywhere. At Bideford the mob interfered to
prevent the export of a cargo of potatoes; at Bridport they broke
into the bakers' shops. Incendiary fires broke out night after night
in the eastern counties. At Swanage six people out of seven were
paupers, and in one parish in Cambridgeshire every person but one was
a pauper or a bankrupt.[585] Corn rose again: by June, 1817, it was 117s.,
but fell to 77s. in September.
In 1818 occurred a drought of four months, lasting from May till
September, and great preparations were made to ward off the expected
famine; immense quantities of wheat came from the Baltic, of maize
from America, and beans and maize from Italy and Egypt, with hay from
New York, as it was selling at £10 a ton. However, rain fell in
September, brown fields suddenly became green, turnips sprang up
where none had appeared, and even spring corn that had lain in the
parched ground began to grow, so the fear of scarcity passed.
In 1822 came a good season, which produced a great crop of wheat; in
the lifetime of the existing generation old men declared that such a
harvest had been known only once before; imports also came from
Ireland to the amount of nearly a million quarters, so that the price
at the end of the year was 38s., and the average price for the year
was 44s. 7d. Beef went down to 2s. 5d. a stone and mutton to 2s. 2d.
The cry of agricultural distress again rose loudly. Farmers were
still, though some of the war taxes had been remitted, heavily taxed;
for the taxes on malt, soap, salt, candles, leather, all pressed
heavily.[586] The chief cause of the distress was the long-felt
reaction after the war, but it was aggravated by the return to cash
payments in 1819. Gold had fallen to its real value, and the fall in
gold had been followed by a fall in the prices of every other
article.[587] The produce of many thousand acres in England did not
sell that year for as much money as was expended in growing it,
without reckoning rent, taxes, and interest on capital.[588] Estates
worth £3,000 a year, says the same writer, some years since, were now
worth £1,000. Bacon had gone down from 6s. 6d. to 2s. 4d. a stone;
Southdown ewes from 50s. to 15s., and lambs from 42s. to 5s.
A Dorset farmer told the Parliamentary committee that since 1815 he
knew of fifty farmers, farming 24,000 acres, who had failed
entirely.[589]
In the _Tyne Mercury_ of October 30, 1821, it was recorded that Mr.
Thos. Cooper of Bow purchased 3 milch cows and 40 sheep for £18 16s.
6d. which sum four years previously would only have bought their
skins. Prime beef was sold in Salisbury market at 4d. retail, and good
joints of mutton at 3-1/2d.[590] Everywhere the farmers were
complaining bitterly, but 'hanging on like sailors to the masts or
hull of a wreck'. In Sussex labourers were being employed to dig holes
and fill them in again, proof enough of distress but also of great
folly. Many thousands of acres were now a mass of thistles and weeds,
once fair grass land ploughed up during the war for wheat, and
abandoned at the fall of prices. There were no less than 475 petitions
on agricultural distress presented to the House from 1820 to March 31,
1822. In 1822, it was proposed that the Government should purchase
wheat grown in England to the value of one million sterling and store
it; also that when the average price of wheat was under 60s. the
Government should advance money on such corn grown in the United
Kingdom as should be deposited in certain warehouses, to an extent not
exceeding two-thirds the value of the corn.[591] There were not
wanting men, however, who put the other side of the question. In a
tract called _The Refutation of the Arguments used on the Subject of
the Agricultural Petition_, written in 1819, it was said that the
increase in the farmer's expenditure was the cause of his discontent.
'He now assumes the manners and demands the equipage of a gentleman,
keeps a table like his landlord, anticipates seasons in their
productions, is as choice in his wines, his horses, and his
furniture.' Let him be more thrifty. 'Let him dismiss his steward, a
character a few years back only known to the great landowner, and
cease from degrading the British farmer into a synonym for
prodigality.' Lord Liverpool, in the House of Lords, in a speech which
roused great opposition among agriculturists, minimized the distress;
distress there was, he admitted, but it was not confined to England,
it was world-wide; neither was it produced by excessive taxation, for
since 1815 taxation had been reduced 25 per cent., while though rents
and prices had fallen they were much higher than before the war.
Another writer said at the time, 'Individuals of all classes have of
late been as it were inflated above their natural size: let this
unnatural growth be reduced; let them resume their proper places and
appearances, and the quantum of substantial enjoyment, real comfort
and happiness, will not be found lessened.' It was also asserted that
the taxes on malt, leather, soap, salt, and candles, were not very
pressing.
The persistent cries of distress produced a Bill giving still further
protection to corn-growers, which was fortunately not carried into
effect. There was no doubt, however, about the reality of the crisis
through which the landed classes were passing. Many of the landowners
were heavily in debt. Mortgages had been multiplied during the war,
and while prices were high payment of interest was easy; but when
prices fell and the tenant threw up his farm, the landlord could not
throw over the mortgage, and the interest hung like a dead weight
round his neck.[592]
The price to which wheat fell at the end of 1822 was to be the lowest
for some years; it soon recovered, and until 1834 the average annual
prices ranged from 53s. to 68s. 6d., while in 1825 beef at Smithfield
was 5s. and mutton 5s. 4d. a stone.
In 1823 there was a marked improvement, and the king's speech
congratulated the country on 'the gradual abatement of those
difficulties under which agriculture has so long suffered.'[593] In
1824 'agriculture was recovering from the depression under which it
laboured.'[594] In 1825 it was said, 'there never was a period in the
history of this country when all the great interests of the nation
were in so thriving a condition.'[595] In that year over-speculation
produced a panic and agricultural distress was again evident. In 1826
Cobbett said, 'the present stock of the farms is not in one-half the
cases the property of the farmer, it is borrowed stock.'[596] In 1828
all the farmers in Kent were said to be insolvent.[597]
At the meeting of Parliament in 1830 the king lamented the state of
affairs, and ascribed it to unfavourable seasons and other causes
beyond the reach of legislative remedy. Many had learnt that high
protection was no protection for farmers, and it was stated more than
once that the large foreign supply of grain, though only then about
one-third of the home-grown, depressed our markets. At the same time,
it must be admitted that agriculture, like all other industries, was
suffering from the crisis of 1825. In 1830, the country was filled
with unrest, in which the farm labourer shared. His motives, however,
were hardly political. He had a rooted belief that machinery was
injuring him, the threshing machine especially; and he avenged himself
by burning the ricks of obnoxious farmers. Letters were sent to
employers demanding higher wages and the disuse of machines, and
notices signed 'Swing' were affixed to gates and buildings. Night
after night incendiary fires broke out, and emboldened by impunity the
rioters proceeded to pillage by day. In Hampshire they moved in bodies
1,500 strong. A special Commission was appointed, and the disorders
put down at last with a firm hand. In 1828 there had been a relaxation
in the duties on corn, the object of the Act passed in that year being
to secure the farmer a constant price of 8s. a bushel instead of 10s.
as in 1815, and by a sliding scale to prevent the disastrous
fluctuations in prices. The best proof of its failure is afforded by
the appointment of another parliamentary committee in 1833 to inquire
into the distressed state of agriculture. At this inquiry many
witnesses asserted that the cultivation of inferior soils and heavy
clays had diminished from one-fourth to one-fifth.[598] It was also
asserted that farmers were paying rent out of capital.[599] Tooke,
however, thought there was much exaggeration of the distress, which
was proved by the way the farmers weathered the low prices of 1835,
when wheat, after a succession of four remarkably good seasons,
averaged 39s. 4d. for the year. In these abundant years, too, he
asserts that the home supply was equal to the demand,[600] though the
committee of 1833 had stated that this had ceased to be the
case.[601] Another committee, the last for many years, sat in 1835 to
consider the distress; but although prices were low the whole tenor of
the evidence established the improvement of farming, the extension of
cultivation, and the increase of produce, and it was noticed at this
time that towns dependent on agriculture were uniformly
prosperous.[602]
On the whole, in spite of exaggeration from interested motives, the
distress for the twenty years after the battle of Waterloo was real
and deep; twenty years of depression succeeded the same period of
false exaltation. The progress, too, during that time was real, and
made, as was remarked, _because_ of adversity. From this time
agriculture slowly revived.
On one point both of the two last committees were agreed, that the
condition of the labourer was improved, and they said he was better
off than at any former period, for his wages remained the same, while
prices of necessaries had fallen. That his wages went further is true,
but they were still miserably low, and he was often housed worse than
the animals on the farm. 'Wattle and dab' (or mud and straw) formed
the walls of his cottage, the floors were often of mud, and all ages
and both sexes frequently slept in one room. A block of ten cottages
were put up in the parish of Holmer[603] at the commencement of the
nineteenth century, which were said to have combined 'comfort,
convenience, and economy;' they each contained one room 12 feet by 14
feet and 6 feet high with a bedroom over, and cost £32 10s. each. They
were evidently considered quite superior dwellings, far better than
the ordinary run of labourer's cottages. Cobbett gives us a picture of
some in Leicestershire in 1826; 'hovels made of mud and straw, bits of
glass, or of old cast-off windows, without frames or hinges
frequently, and merely stuck in the mud wall. Enter them and look at
the bits of chairs or stools, the wretched boards tacked together to
serve for a table, the floor of pebble, broken brick, or of the bare
ground; look at the thing called a bed, and survey the rags on the
backs of the wretched inhabitants.'[604] The chief exceptions to this
state of affairs were the estates of many of the great landlords. On
that of the Earl of Winchelsea in Rutland, the cottages he had built
contained a kitchen, parlour, dairy, two bedrooms, and a cow-house,
and several had small holdings attached of from 5 to 20 acres.[605]
Not long before, wages in Hampshire and Wiltshire were 5s. and 6s. a
week.[606]
In 1822 it was stated that 'beef and mutton are things the taste of
which was unknown to the mass of labourers. No one has lived more in
cottages than I, and I declare solemnly I never remember once to have
seen such a thing.'[607] A group of women labourers, whom Cobbett saw
by the roadside in Hampshire, presented 'such an assemblage of rags as
I never saw before even amongst the hoppers at Farnham.'[608]
The labourer's wages may have gone a little further, but he had lost
his by-industries, his bit of land and rights of common, and would
have had a very different tale to tell from that of the framers of the
reports above quoted.
In spite of the complaints made that the improvements of the coaches
and of the roads drew the countryman to the towns, many stirred hardly
at all from their native parish, and their lives were now infinitely
duller than in the Middle Ages. The great event of the year was the
harvest home, which was usually a scene of great merry-making. In
Devonshire, when a farmer's wheat was ripe he sent round notice to the
neighbourhood, and men and women from all sides came to reap the crop.
As early as eleven or twelve, so much ale and cider had been drunk
that the shouts and ribald jokes of the company were heard to a
considerable distance, attracting more helpers, who came from far and
near, but none were allowed to come after 12 o'clock. Between 12 and 1
came dinner, with copious libations of ale and cider, which lasted
till 2, when reaping was resumed and went on without interruption
except from the squabbles of the company till 5, when what were called
'drinkings', or more food and drink, were taken into the field and
consumed. After this the corn reaped was bound into sheaves till
evening, when after the sport of throwing their reaping hooks at a
sheaf which had been set up as a mark for a prize, all proceeded to
supper and more ale and cider till the small hours.[609]
No wages were paid at these harvestings, but the unlimited amount of
eating and drinking was very expensive, and about this date the
practice of using hired labour had largely superseded this old custom.
The close of this period was marked by two Acts of great benefit to
farmers: the Poor Law Amendment Act of 1834 (4 & 5 Wm. IV, c. 76),
which reduced the rates,[610] and marked 'the beginning of a period
of slow recovery in the labourer's standard of life, moral and
material, though at first it brought him not a little adversity'[611];
and the Tithe Commutation Act of 1836 (6 & 7 Wm. IV, c. 71), which
substituted for the tithe paid in kind or the fluctuating commuted
tithe, a tithe rent charge equivalent to the market value, on a
septennial average, of the exact quantities of wheat, barley, and
oats, which made up the legal tithes by the estimate in 1836. Thus was
removed a perpetual source of dispute and antagonism between
tithe-payer and tithe-owner. The system hitherto pursued, moreover,
was wasteful. In exceptionally favourable circumstances the clergy did
not receive more than two-thirds of the value of the tithe in kind.
The delays were a frequent source of loss. In rainy weather, when the
farmer desired to get his crops in quickly, he was obliged to shock
his crops, give the tithe-owners notice to set out their tithes, and
wait for their arrival; in the meantime the crop, perhaps, being badly
damaged.[612]
FOOTNOTES:
[585] Walpole, _History of England_, i. 161.
[586] _Inquiry into Agricultural Distress_ (1822), p. 40.
[587] Walpole, _op. cit._ ii. 22.
[588] _A Letter to the Earl of Liverpool by an Old Tory_, 1822. The
Committee on Agricultural Distress found that farmers were paying rent
out of capital (_Parliamentary Reports. Committees_, v. 71), and that
leases fixed on the basis of the high prices of the war meant ruin to
the farmer if held to his engagement.
[589] _Parliamentary Reports, Committees_, ix. 138.
[590] Cobbett, _Rural Rides_ (ed. 1885), i. 3, 16.
[591] _Report of the Committee on Agricultural Depression_ (1822), pp.
3, 4.
[592] Walpole, _History of England_, ii. 23.
[593] _Hansard_, ix. 1544.
[594] Ibid. x. 1, 2.
[595] Ibid. xii. 1.
[596] _Rural Rides_, ii. 199.
[597] Walpole, _History of England_, ii. 526. The distress was
aggravated by rot among sheep, which is said to have destroyed
one-fourth of those in the kingdom. See _Parliamentary Reports,
Commissioners_ (1836), viii (2), p. 198.
[598] Tooke, _History of Prices_, ii. 227.
[599] _Report_ of 1833, p. 6.
[600] Tooke, _History of Prices_, ii, 238.
[601] Imports fell considerably at this date; they were:
1832 1,254,351 quarters.
1833 1,166,457 "
1834 981,486 "
1835 750,808 "
1836 861,156 "
1837 1,109,492 "
1838 1,923,400 "
There were also considerable exports:
1832 289,558 quarters.
1833 96,212 "
1834 159,482 "
1835 134,076 "
1836 256,978 "
1837 308,420 "
1838 158,621 "
McCulloch, _Commercial Dictionary_ (1847), p. 438.
[602] Porter, _Progress of the Nation_, p. 151.
[603] See Duncumb, _General View of Herefordshire_, (1805).
[604] Rural Rides, ii. 348.
[605] London, _Encyclopaedia of Agriculture_ (1831), p. 1156.
[606] Cobbett, _Rural Rides_, i. 149. The average, however, now was
about 9s.; see _Parliamentary Reports_, v. 72.
[607] _A Letter to the Earl of Liverpool by an Old Tory_ (1822), p.
16.
[608] _Rural Rides_, i. 18.
[609] Moore, _History of Devonshire_, i. 430.
[610] By this Act and the various amending Acts the law of settlement,
so long a burden on the labourer, is now settled thus: a settlement
may be acquired by birth, parentage, marriage, renting a tenement, by
being bound apprentice and inhabiting, by estate, payment of taxes,
and by residence.--Stephen, _Commentaries on the Laws of England_
(1903), iii. 87.
[611] Hasbach, _op. cit._ p. 217.
[612] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (1901), p. 9.
CHAPTER XX
1837-1875
REVIVAL OF AGRICULTURE.--THE ROYAL AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY.--CORN LAW
REPEAL.--A TEMPORARY SET-BACK.--THE HALCYON DAYS
The revival of agriculture roughly coincided with the accession of
Queen Victoria.
It was proved that Scotch farmers who had farmed highly had weathered
the storm. Instead of repeatedly calling on Parliament to help them
they had helped themselves, by spending large sums in draining and
manuring the land; they had adopted the subsoil plough, and the
drainage system of Smith of Deanston, used machinery to economize
labour, and improved the breed of stock. This was an object-lesson
for the English farmer, and he began to profit by it. It was high
time that he did. In spite of the undoubted progress made, farming
was still often terribly backward. Little or no machinery was used,
implements were often bad, teams too large, drilling little
practised, drainage utterly inefficient; in fact, while one farmer
used all the improvements made, a hundred had little to do with them.
But better times were at hand.
About 1835 Elkington's system of drainage, which among the more
advanced agriculturists, at any rate, had been used for half a
century, was superseded by that of James Smith of Deanston, a system
of thorough drainage and deep ploughing, which effected a complete
revolution in the art of draining, and holds the field to-day.
Hitherto the draining of land had been done by a few drains where they
were thought necessary, which was often a failure. Smith initiated a
complete system of parallel underground drains, near enough to each,
other to catch all the superfluous water, running into a main drain
which ran along the lowest part of the ground. His system has also
been called 'furrow or frequent draining', as the drains were
generally laid in the furrows from two to two-and-a-half feet deep at
short intervals. Even then the tributary drains were at first filled
in with stones 12 inches deep, as they had been for centuries, and
sometimes with thorns, or even turves, as tiles were still expensive;
and the main was made of stonework. However, the invention of machines
for making tiles cheapened them, and the substitution of cylindrical
pipes for horse-shoe tiles laid on flat soles still further lowered
the cost and increased the efficiency.[613] In 1848, Peel introduced
Government Drainage Loans, repayable by twenty-two instalments of 6
1/2 per cent. This was consequently an era of extensive drainage works
all over England, which sorely needed it; but even now the work was
often badly done. In some cases it was the custom for the tenant to
put in as many tiles as his landlord gave him, and they were often
merely buried. At Stratfieldsaye, for instance, where the Iron Duke
was a generous and capable landlord, the drains were sometimes a foot
deep, while others were 6 feet deep and 60 feet apart,[614] although
the soil required nothing of the kind.
Vast sums were also spent on farm-buildings, still often old and
rickety, with deficient and insanitary accommodation; in Devonshire
the farmer was bound by his lease to repair 'old mud and wooden
houses', at a cost of 10 per cent. on his rent, and there were many
such all over England. Farm-buildings were often at the extreme end
of the holding, the cattle were crowded together in draughty sheds,
and the farmyard was generally a mass of filth and spoiling manure,
spoiling because all the liquid was draining away from it into the
pool where the live stock drank; a picture, alas, often true to-day.
It was to bring the great mass of landlords and farmers into line with
those who had made the most of what progress there had been, that the
Royal Society was founded in 1838, in imitation of the Highland
Society, but also owing to the realization of the great benefits
conferred on farming during the last half-century by the exertions of
Agricultural Societies, the Smithfield Club Shows having especially
aided the breeding of live stock.
Writing on the subject of the Society, Mr. Handley[615] spoke of the
wretched modes of farming still to be seen in the country, especially
in the case of arable land, though there had been a marked improvement
in the breeding of stock. Prejudice, as ever, was rampant. Bone
manure, though in the previous twenty years it had worked wonders, was
in many parts unused. It was felt that what the English farmer needed
was 'practice with science'. The first President of the Society was
Earl Spencer, and it at once set vigorously to work, recommending
prizes for essays on twenty-four subjects, some of which are in the
first volume of the Society's Journal. Prizes were also offered for
the best draining-plough, the best implement for crushing gorse, for a
ploughing match to be held at the first country meeting of the Society
fixed at Oxford in 1839, for the best cultivated farm in Oxfordshire
and the adjacent counties, and for the invention of any new
agricultural implement.
In 1840 the Society was granted a charter under the title of the Royal
Agricultural Society of England, and its career since then has been
one of continued usefulness, and forms a prominent feature in the
agricultural history of the times.
In 1839[616] the first country meeting of the Society was held at
Oxford, and its 247 entries of live stock and 54 of implements were
described as constituting a show of unprecedented magnitude. According
to _Bell's Weekly Messenger_ for July 22, 1839, the show for some time
had been the all-absorbing topic of conversation not only among
agriculturists, but among the community at large, and the first day
20,000 people attended the show, many having come great distances by
road. Everybody and every exhibit had to get to Oxford by road; some
Shorthorn cattle, belonging to the famous Thomas Bates of
Kirkleavington, took nearly three weeks on the road, coming from
London to Aylesbury by canal. But such a journey was not unusual then,
for cattle were often two or three weeks on the road to great fairs,
and stood the journey best on hay; it was surprising how fresh and
sound they finished.[617] The show ground covered 7 acres, and among
the implements tested was a subsoil plough, Biddell's Scarifier, and a
drill for depositing manure after turnips. There were only six classes
for cattle--Shorthorns, Herefords, Devons, Cattle of any other breed,
Dairy Cattle, and Oxen; one class for horses, and three for
sheep--Leicesters, Southdown or other Short Wool, and Long Woolled;
with one for pigs.[618] The Shorthorns, with the exception of the
Kirkleavingtons, were bred in the neighbourhood, and many good judges
said long afterwards that a finer lot had not been seen since. The
Duchesses especially impressed all who saw them. The rest of the live
stock was in no way remarkable.
From this small beginning, then thought so much of, the show grew
fast, and the Warwick meeting[619] of 1892, after several years of
agricultural depression, illustrates the excellent work of the Society
and the enormous progress made by English agriculture. The show ground
covered 90 acres; horses were now divided into Thoroughbred Stallions,
Hunters, Coach Horses, Hackneys, Ponies, Harness Horses and Ponies,
Shires, Clydesdales, Suffolks, and Agricultural Horses. Cattle were
classified as Shorthorns, Herefords, Devons, Sussex, Longhorns
(described as few in number and of no particular quality, 'a breed
which has now been many years on the wane', but has recently been
revived),[620] Welsh, Red Polled, Jerseys, Guernseys, Kerry and
Dexter-Kerry.
The increased variety of sheep was also striking; Leicesters,
Cotswolds, Lincolns, Oxford Downs, Shropshires, Southdowns, Hampshire
Downs, Suffolks, Border Leicesters, Clun Forest, and Welsh Mountain.
Pigs were divided into Large, Middle, and Small white Berkshires, any
other black breed, and Tamworths.
Altogether the total number of stock exhibited was 1,858, and the
number of implements was 5,430.
In 1840 appeared Liebig's _Chemistry in its Application to Agriculture
and Physiology_, tracing the relations between the nutrition of plants
and the composition of the soil, a book which was received with
enthusiasm, and completely changed the attitude which agriculturists
generally had maintained towards chemistry; one of contempt, founded
on ignorance.
But, as Mr. Prothero has said,[621] 'if the new agriculture was born
in the laboratory of Glissen, it grew into strength at the
experimental station of Rothamsted.' There, for more than half a
century, Lawes and Gilbert conducted experiments, of vast benefit to
agriculture, in the objects, method, and effect of manuring; the
scientific bases for the rotation of crops, and the results of various
foods on animals in the production of meat, milk, and manure.
The use of artificial manures now spread rapidly; bones, used long
before uncrushed, are said to have been first crushed in 1772, and
their value was realized by Coke of Holkham, but for long they were
crushed by hammer or horse mill, and their use was consequently
limited. Then iron rollers worked by steam ground them cheaply and
effectively, and their use soon spread, though it was not till about
1840 that it can be said to have become general. Its effects were
often described as wonderful. In Cheshire, cheese-making had
exhausted the soil, and it was said that by boning and draining an
additional cow could be kept for every 4 acres, and tenants readily
paid 7 per cent. to their landlords for expenditure in bone manure.
Its use had indeed raised many struggling farmers to comparative
independence.[622] A very large quantity of the bones used came from
South America.[623] Porter also noticed that 'since 1840 an extensive
trade has been carried on in an article called Guano', the guana of
Davy, 'from the islands of the Pacific and off the coast of Africa'.
Nitrate of soda was just coming in, but was not much used till some
years later. In 1840 Liebig suggested the treatment of bones with
sulphuric acid, and in 1843 Lawes patented the process and set up his
works at Deptford.[624]
Italian rye grass, not to be confounded with the old English ray
grass, had been introduced by Thomson of Banchory, in 1834, from
Munich;[625] and though the swede was known at the end of the
eighteenth century, in many parts it had only just become common. In
Notts it was in 1844 described as having recently become 'the
sheet-anchor of the farmer'.[626] In Cheshire a writer at the same
date said, 'in the year 1814 there were not 5 acres of Swedish turnips
grown in the parish where I reside; now there are from 60 to 80, and
in many parts of the county the increase has been in a much greater
ratio.'[627]
About this time a remedy was found in the south for leaving the land
idle during the nine months between harvesting the corn crop in
August, and sowing the turnip crop in the following June, by sowing
rye, which was eaten green by the sheep in May, a good preparation for
the succeeding winter crop. Turnip cutters were at last being used,
and corn and cake crushers soon followed.
The seasons from 1838 to 1841 were bad, and must be characterized as
a period of dearth, wheat keeping at a good price.[628] That of 1844-5
was remarkable for the first general appearance of the potato disease,
not only in these islands but on the continent of Europe.[629] In
August, 1846, the worst apprehensions of the failure of the crop were
more than realized, and the terrible results in Ireland are well
known. In the early part of 1847 there was a fear of scarcity in corn,
and the price of wheat rose to 102s. 5d. in spite of an importation of
4,500,000 quarters, but this was largely owing to the absence of any
reliable agricultural statistics, which were not furnished till 1866,
and the price soon fell.[630]
We have now reached the period of free trade, when the Corn Laws,
which had protected agriculture more or less effectually for so long,
were definitely abandoned. That they had failed to prevent great
fluctuations in the price of corn is abundantly evident, it is also
equally evident that they kept up the average price; in the ten years
from 1837 to 1846, the average price of wheat was 58s. 7d. a quarter,
in the seven years from 1848 to 1853, the average price was 48s.
2d.[631]
The average imports of wheat and flour for the same period were
2,161,813 and 4,401,000 quarters respectively. But to obtain the real
effect of free trade on prices, the prices for the period between 1815
and 1846 must be compared with those between 1846 and the present day,
when the fall is enormous.
The Act of 1815, which Tooke said had failed to secure any one of the
objects aimed at by its promoters, had received two important
alterations. In 1828 (9 Geo. IV, c. 60) a duty of 36s. 8d. was imposed
when the price was 50s., decreasing to 1s. when it was 73s.
In 1843 (5 Vict. c. 14) a duty of 20s. was imposed when the price was
50s., and the duty became 7s. when the price reached 65s.
A contemporary writer denies that these duties benefited the farmer at
all: 'if the present shifting scale of duty was intended to protect
the farmer, keep the prices of corn steady, insure a supply to the
consumer at a moderate price, and benefit the revenue, it has signally
failed. During the continuation of the Corn Laws the farmers have
suffered the greatest privations. The variations in price have been
extreme, and when a supply of foreign corn has been required it has
only reached the consumer at a high price, and benefited the revenue
little.'[632] Rents of farms were often calculated not on the market
price of wheat, but on the price thought to be fixed by the duties,
which was occasionally much higher.[633]
It was also said that but for the restrictions that had been imposed
in the supposed interests of agriculture, the skill and enterprise of
farmers would have been better directed than it had been. By means of
these restrictions and the consequent enhancement of the cost of
living, the cultivation of the land had been injuriously restricted,
for the energies of farmers had been limited to producing certain
descriptions of food, and they had neglected others which would have
been far[634] more profitable. The landlord had profited by higher
rents, but, according to Caird, a most competent observer, had
generally speaking been induced by a reliance on protection to neglect
his duty to his estates, so that buildings were poor, and drainage
neglected. The labourer was little if any better off than eighty years
before. It was a mystery even to farmers how they lived in many parts
of the country; 'our common drink,' said one, 'is burnt crust tea, we
never know what it is to get enough to eat.'[635] Against these
disadvantages can only be put the fact that protection had kept up the
price of corn, a calamity for the mass of the people.
The amount of wheat imported into England before the era of Corn Law
repeal was inconsiderable. Mr. Porter has shown[636] how very small a
proportion of wheat used in this country was imported from 1801-44.
From 1801 to 1810 the average annual import of wheat into the kingdom
was 600,946 quarters, or a little over a peck annually per head, the
average annual consumption per head being about eight bushels. Between
1811 and 1820 the average importation was 458,578 quarters, or for the
increased population a gallon-and-a-half per head, and the same share
for each person was imported in the next decade 1821-30. From 1831-40
the average imports arose to 607,638 quarters, or two-and-a-quarter
gallons per head, and in 1841-4 an average import of 1,901,495
quarters raised the average supply to four-and-a-half gallons per
person, still a very small proportion of the amount consumed.
In 1836 a small association had been formed in London for advocating
the repeal of the Corn Laws, and in 1838 a similar association was
formed in Manchester.[637] At one of its earliest meetings appeared
Richard Cobden, under whose guidance the association became the
Anti-Corn Law League, and at whose invitation John Bright joined the
League. Under these two men the Anti-Corn Law League commenced its
great agitation, its object being 'to convince the manufacturer that
the Corn Laws were interfering with the growth of trade, to persuade
the people that they were raising the price of food, to teach the
agriculturist that they had not even the solitary merit of securing a
fixed price for corn'. The country was deluged with pamphlets, backed
up by constant public meetings; and these efforts, aided by
unfavourable seasons, convinced many of the errors of protection. In
1840 the League spent £5,700 in distributing 160,000 circulars and
150,000 pamphlets, and in delivering 400 lectures to 800,000 people.
Bakers were persuaded to bake taxed and untaxed shilling loaves, and,
on the purchaser choosing the larger, to demand the tax from the
landlord; in 1843 the League collected £50,000, next year £100,000,
and in 1845 £250,000 in support of their agitation.
Yet for some years they had little success in Parliament; even in 1842
Peel only amended the laws; and it was not until 1846 that, convinced
by the League's arguments, as he himself confessed, and stimulated by
the famine in Ireland, he introduced the famous Act, 9 & 10 Vict. c.
22.
By this the maximum duty on imported wheat was at once to be reduced
to 10s. a quarter when the price was under 48s., to 5s. on barley when
the price was under 26s., and to 4s. on oats when the price was under
18s., with lower duties as prices rose above these figures, but the
most important part of the Act was that on February 1, 1849, these
duties were to cease, and only a nominal duty of 1s. a quarter on
foreign corn be retained, which was abolished in 1860.
By 9 and 10 Vict. c. 23 the duties on live stock were also abolished
entirely. Down to 1842 the importation of horned cattle, sheep, hogs,
and other animals used as food was strictly prohibited,[638] but in
that year the prohibition was withdrawn and they were allowed to enter
the country on a payment of 20s. a head on oxen and bulls, 15s. on
cows, 3s. on sheep, 5s. on hogs; which duties continued till 1846.
It is interesting to find that so shrewd an observer as McCulloch did
not expect any great increase in the imports of live animals from the
reduction of the duties, but he anticipated a great increase in salted
meat from abroad; cold storage being then undreamt of.
The full effect of this momentous change was not to be felt for a
generation, but the immediate effect was an agricultural panic
apparently justified by falling prices. In 1850 wheat averaged 40s.
3d. and in 1851 38s. 6d. On the other hand, stock farmers were doing
well. But on the corn lands the prices of the protection era had to
come down; many farms were thrown up, some arable turned into pasture;
distress was widespread. Owing to the depressed state of agriculture
in 1850, the _Times_ sent James Caird on a tour through England, and
one of the most important conclusions arrived at in his account of his
tour is, that owing to protection, the majority of landowners had
neglected their land; but another cause of neglect was that the great
body of English landlords knew nothing of the management of their
estates, and committed it to agents who knew little more and merely
received the rents. The important business of being a landowner is the
only one for which no special training is provided. Many of the
landlords, however, then, as now, were unable to improve their estates
if they desired to do so, as they were hopelessly encumbered, and the
expense of sale was almost prohibitive. The contrast between good and
bad farmers was more marked in 1850 than to-day, the efforts of the
Royal Agricultural Society to raise the general standard of farming
had not yet borne much fruit. In many counties, side by side, were
farmers who used every modern improvement, and those who still
employed the methods of the eighteenth century: on one farm wheat
producing 40 bushels an acre, threshed by steam at a cost of 3s. 6d.,
on the next 20 bushels to the acre threshed by the flail at a cost of
9s.[639]
Drainage in the counties where it was needed had made considerable
progress, the removal of useless hedgerows often crowded with timber,
that kept the sun from the crops and whose roots absorbed much of the
nourishment of the soil, was slowly extending, but farm-buildings
almost everywhere were defective. 'The inconvenient ill-arranged
hovels, the rickety wood and thatch barns and sheds devoid of every
known improvement for economizing labour, food, and manure, which are
to be met with in every county in England, are a reproach to the
landlords in the eyes of all good farmers.'[640] The farm-buildings of
Belgium, Holland, France, and the Rhenish Provinces were much
superior. In parts of England indeed no progress seems to have been
made for generations at this date. Thousands of acres of peat moss in
Lancashire were unreclaimed, and many parts of the Fylde district were
difficult even to traverse. Even in Warwickshire, in the heart of
England, between Knowle and Tamworth, instead of signs of industry and
improvement were narrow winding lanes leading to nothing, traversed by
lean pigs and rough cattle, broad copse-like hedges, small and
irregular fields of couch, amidst which straggled the stalks of some
smothered cereal; these with gipsy encampments and the occasional
sound of the poacher's gun from woods and thickets around were the
characteristics of the district.[641]
Leases were the exception throughout England, though more prevalent in
the west.[642] The greater proportion of farms were held on yearly
agreements terminable by six months' notice on either side, a system
preferred by the landlord as enabling him to retain a greater hold
over his land, and acquiesced in by the tenant because of easy rents.
In spite of this insecurity of tenure and the absence of Agricultural
Holdings Acts, the tenants invested their capital largely with no
other security than the landlord's character, 'for in no country of
the world does the character of any class of men stand so high for
fair and generous dealing as that of the great body of the English
landlords.'
The custom of tenant-right was unknown except in certain counties,
Surrey, Sussex, the Weald of Kent, Lincoln, North Notts, and in part
of the West Riding of Yorkshire.[643] Where it existed, the
agriculture was on the whole inferior to that of the districts where
it did not, and it had frequently led to fraud in a greater or less
degree. Many farmers were in the practice of 'working up to a
quitting', or making a profit by the difference which their ingenuity
and that of their valuer enabled them to demand at leaving as compared
with what they paid on entry. The best farmers as well as the
landlords were said to be disgusted with the system. The dislike for
leases in the days immediately before the repeal of the Corn Laws was
partly due to the uncertainty how long protection would last; but
chiefly then, as afterwards, to the fact that if a man improved his
farm under a lease he had nearly always to pay an increased rent on
renewal, but if he held from year to year his improvement, if any, was
so gradual and imperceptible that it was hardly noticed and the rent
was not raised. It may also be attributable to the modern
disinclination to be bound down to a particular spot for a long
period. At all events, the general dislike of farmers for leases is a
curious commentary on the assertions of those writers who said that
leases were his chief necessity.
The disparity of the labourer's wages in 1850 was most remarkable,
ranging from 15s. a week in parts of Lancashire to 6s. in South Wilts,
the average of the northern counties being 11s. 6d., and of the
southern 8s. 5d. a difference due wholly to the influence of
manufactures, which is still further proved by the fact that in
Lancashire in 1770 wages were below the average for England. In fact
since Young's time wages in the north had increased 66 per cent., in
the south only 14 per cent. In Berkshire and Wiltshire there had been
no increase in that period, and in Suffolk an actual decrease. It is
not surprising to learn that in some southern counties wages were not
sufficient for healthy sustenance, and the consequence was, that
there, the average amount of poor relief per head of population was
8s. 8-1/2d., but in the north 4s. 7-3/4d., and the percentage of
paupers was twice as great in the former as in the latter. This was
mainly due to two causes: (1) the ratepayers of parishes in the south
were accustomed to divide among themselves the surplus labour, not
according to their requirements but in proportion to the size of their
farms, so that a farmer who was a good economist of labour was reduced
by this system to the same level as his unskilful neighbours, and the
labourer himself had no motive to do his best, as every one, good and
bad, was employed at the same rate. (2) To the system of close and
open parishes, by which large proprietors could drive the labourer
from the parish where he worked to live in some distant village in
case he should become chargeable to the rates, so that it was a common
thing to see labourers walking three or four miles each day to their
work and back, and in one county farmers provided donkeys for them.
Between 1840 and 1850 the labourer had, however, already benefited by
free trade, for the price of many articles he consumed fell 30%; on
the other hand the rent of his cottage in eighty years had increased
100%, and meat 70%, which however did not, unfortunately, affect him
much. The great development of railway construction also helped him by
absorbing much surplus labour, and the work of his wife and children
was more freely exploited at this date to swell the family
budget.[644]
The great difference between the wages of the north and the south is
a clear proof that the wages of the agricultural labourer are not
dependent on the prices of agricultural produce, for those were the
same in both regions. It was unmistakably due to the greater demand
for labour in the north.
The housing of the labourer was, especially in the south, often a
black blot on English civilization. From many instances collected by
an inquirer in 1844 the following may be taken. At Stourpaine in
Dorset, one bedroom in a cottage contained three beds occupied by
eleven people of all ages and both sexes, with no curtain or partition
whatever. At Milton Abbas, on the average of the last census there
were thirty-six persons in each house, and so crowded were they that
cottagers with a desire for decency would combine and place all the
males in one cottage, and all the females in another. But this was
rare, and licentiousness and immorality of the worst kind were
frequent.[645]
As for the farmer, the stock raiser was doing better than the corn
grower. The following table shows the rent of cultivated land per
acre, the produce of wheat per acre in bushels, the price of
provisions, wages of labour, and rent of cottages in England at the
date of Young's tours, about 1770, and of Caird's in 1850[647]:
Rent of Produce of
cultivated land Wheat Price per lb. of
per acre. per acre. Bread. Meat. Butter.
1770 13s. 4d. 23 1-1/2d. 3-1/4d. 6d.
1850 26s. 10d. 26-3/4[646] 1-1/4d. 5d. 1s.
Price of Wool Cottage Labourer's wages
per lb. rents. per week.
1770 5-1/2d. 34s. 8d. 7s. 3d.
1850 1s. 74s. 6d. 9s. 7d.
Thus in eighty years the average rent of arable land rose 100%, the
average wheat crop 14%, while the price of bread had decreased 16%.
But meat had increased 70%, wool over 100%, butter 100%. The chief
benefit to the farmer therefore lay in the increased value of live
stock and its products, and it was found then, as in the present
depression, that the holders of strong wheat land suffered most, which
was further illustrated by the fact that the rent of the corn-growing
counties of the east coast averaged 23s. 8d. per acre; that of the
mixed corn and grass counties in the midlands and west, 31s. 5d.
Writing in 1847, Porter said rents had doubled since 1790.[648] In
Essex farms could be pointed out which were let in 1790 at less than
10s. an acre, but during the war at from 45s. to 50s. In 1818 the rent
went down to 35s., and in 1847 was 20s.
In Berks. and Wilts. farms let at 14s. per acre in 1790, rose by 1810
to 70s., or fivefold; sank in 1820 to 50s., and in 1847 to 30s. In
Staffordshire farms on one estate let for 8s. an acre in 1790, rose
during the war to 35s., and at the peace were lowered to 20s., at
which price they remained. Owing to better farming light soils had
been applied to uses for which heavy lands alone had formerly been
considered fit, with a considerable increase of rent.
On the Duke of Rutland's[649] Belvoir estate, of from 18,000 to 20,000
acres of above average quality, rents were in--
1799 19s. 3-3/4d. an acre.
1812 25s. 8-3/4d. "
1830 25s. 1-3/4d. "
1850 36s. 8d. "
But the Dukes of Rutland were indulgent landlords and evidently took
no undue advantage of the high prices during the war, a policy whose
wisdom was fully justified afterwards.
It was the opinion of most competent judges, even after the abolition
of the Corn Laws, that English land would continue to rise in value.
Porter stated that the United Kingdom could never be habitually
dependent on the soil of other countries for the food of its people,
there was not enough shipping to transport it if it could.[650]
Caird prophesied that in the next eighty years the value of land in
England would more than double. The wellnigh universal opinion was
that as the land of England could not increase, and the population was
constantly increasing, land must become dearer. Men failed to foresee
the opening of millions of acres of virgin soil in other parts of the
world, and the improvement of transport to such an extent that wheat
has occasionally been carried as ballast. About twenty-five or thirty
years after these prophecies their fallacy began to be cruelly
exposed.[651]
About 1853[652] matters began to mend, chiefly owing to the great
expansion in trade that followed the great gold discoveries in America
and Australia. Then, came the Crimean War, with the closing of the
Baltic to the export of Russian corn, wheat in 1855 averaging 74s.
8d., and in the next decade the American War crippled another
competitor, the imports of wheat from the United States sinking from
16,140,000 cwt in 1862, to 635,000 cwt. in 1866. From 1853 until 1875
English agriculture prospered exceedingly, assisted largely by good
seasons. Between 1854 and 1865 there were ten good harvests, and only
two below the average. Prices of produce rose almost continuously, and
the price and rent of land with them. The trade of the country was
good, and the demand for the farmer's products steadily grew; the
capital value of the land, live stock, and crops upon it, increased in
this period by £445,000,000.[653]
It appeared as if the abolition of the Corn Laws was not to have any
great effect after all.
Now at last the great body of farmers began to approach the standard
set them long before by the more energetic and enterprising. Early
maturity in finishing live stock for the market by scientific feeding
probably added a fourth to their weight The produce of crops per acre
grew, and drainage and improvements were carried out on all sides, the
greatest improvement being made in the cultivation and management of
strong lands, of which drainage was the foundation, and enabled the
occupier to add swedes to his course of cropping.[654]
It was in this period that Shorthorns, Herefords, and Devons attained
a standard of excellence which has made them sought after by the whole
world; and other breeds were perfected, the Sussex and Aberdeen Angus
especially; while in sheep the improvement was perhaps even
greater.[655] The improved Lincolns, Oxford Downs, Hampshire Downs,
and Shropshires took their place as standard breeds at this period. In
1866, after many years of expectation and disappointment,
agriculturists were furnished with statistics which are trustworthy
for practical purpose, but are somewhat vitiated by the fact that the
live stock census was taken on March 5, which obviously omitted a
large number of young stock; so that those for 1867, when the census
was taken on June 25, are better for purposes of comparison with those
of subsequent years, when the census has been taken on June 4 or 5.
Between 1867 and 1878 the cattle in England and Wales had increased
from 4,013,564 to 4,642,641, though sheep had diminished from
22,025,498 to 21,369,810.[656] The total acreage under cultivation had
increased from 25,451,526 acres to 27,164,326 acres in the same
period.
There was, however, one black shadow in this fair picture: in 1865
England was invaded by the rinderpest, which spread with alarming
rapidity, killing 2,000 cows in a month from its first appearance, and
within six months infecting thirty-six counties.[657] The alarm was
general, and town and country meetings were held in the various
districts where the disease appeared to concert measures of defence.
The Privy Council issued an order empowering Justices to appoint
inspectors authorized to seize and slaughter any animal labouring
under such diseases; but, in spite of this, the plague raged with
redoubled fury throughout September. There was gross mismanagement in
combating it, for the inspectors were often ignorant men, and no
compensation was paid for slaughter, so that farmers often sold off
most of their diseased stock before hoisting the black flag. The
ravages of the disease in the London cow-houses was fearful, as might
be expected, and they are said to have been left empty; by no means an
unmixed evil, as the keeping of cow-houses in towns was a glaring
defiance of the most obvious sanitary laws. In October a Commission
was appointed to investigate the origin and nature of the disease, and
the first return showed a total of 17,673 animals attacked. By March
9, 1866, 117,664 animals had died from the plague, and 26,135 been
killed in the attempt to stay it. By the end of August the disease had
been brought within very narrow limits, and was eventually stamped out
by the resolute slaughter of all infected animals. By November 24 the
number of diseased animals that had died or been killed was
209,332,[658] and the loss to the nation was reckoned at £3,000,000.
The disease was brought by animals exported from Russia, who came from
Revel, via the Baltic, to Hull. In 1872, cattle brought to the same
port infected the cattle of the East Riding of Yorkshire, but this
outbreak was checked before much damage had been done, and since 1877
there has been no trace of this dreaded disease in the kingdom. The
cattle plague, rinderpest, or steppe murrain, is said[659] to have
first appeared in England in 1665, the year of the Great Plague, and
reappeared in 1714, when it came from Holland, but did little damage,
being chiefly confined to the neighbourhood of London. The next
outbreak was in 1745, and lasted for twelve years, undoubtedly coming
from Holland; it is said to have caused such destruction among the
cattle, that much of the grass land in England was ploughed up and
planted with corn, so that the exports of grain increased largely. In
1769 it came again, but only affected a few localities, and
disappeared in 1771, not to return till 1865.
Foot and mouth disease was first observed in England in 1839,[660]
and it was malignant in 1840-1, when cattle, sheep, and pigs were
attacked as they were during the serious outbreak of 1871-2. In 1883
no less than 219,289 cattle were attacked, besides 217,492 sheep, and
24,332 pigs, when the disease was worse than it has ever been in
England. Since then, though there have been occasional outbreaks, it
has much abated. Another dread scourge of cattle, pleuro-pneumonia,
was at its worst in 1872, a most calamitous year in this respect, when
7,983 cattle were attacked. In 1890 the Board of Agriculture assumed
powers with respect to it under the Diseases of Animals Act of that
year, and their consequent action has been attended with great success
in getting rid of the disease.
At the end of this halcyon period farmers had to contend with a new
difficulty, the demand for higher wages by their labourers at the
instigation of Joseph Arch.[661] This famous agitator was born at
Barford in Warwickshire in 1826, and as a boy worked for neighbouring
farmers, educating himself in his spare time. The miserable state of
the labourer which he saw all around him entered into his soul, meat
was rarely seen on his table, even bacon was a luxury in many
cottages. Tea was 6s. to 7s. a lb., sugar 8d., and other prices in
proportion; the labourers stole turnips for food, and every other man
was a poacher. Arch made himself master of everything he undertook,
became famous as a hedger, mower, and ploughman, and being
consequently employed all over the Midlands and South Wales, began to
gauge the discontent of the labourer who was then voiceless, voteless,
and hopeless. His wages by 1872 had increased to 12s. a week, but had
not kept pace with the rise in prices. Bread was 7-1/2d. a loaf; the
labourer had lost the benefit of his children's labour, for they had
now all gone to school; his food was 'usually potatoes, dry bread,
greens, herbs, "kettle broth" made by putting bread in the kettle,
weak tea, bacon sometimes, fresh meat hardly ever.'[662] It is
difficult to realize that at the end of the third quarter of the
nineteenth century, when Gladstone said the prosperity of the country
was advancing 'by leaps and bounds', that any class of the community
_in full work_ could live under such wretched conditions. Arch came to
the conclusion that labour could only improve its position when
organized, and the Agricultural Labourers' Union was initiated in
1872. Not that the idea of obtaining better conditions by combination
was new to the rural labourer. It was attempted in 1832 in Dorset, but
speedily crushed, and not till 1865 was a new union founded in
Scotland, which was followed by a strike in Buckinghamshire in 1867,
and the foundation of a union in Herefordshire in 1871.[663] It was
determined to ask for 16s. a week and a 9-1/2 hours' working day,
which the farmers refused to grant, and the men struck. The agitation
spread all over England, and was often conducted unwisely and with a
bitter spirit, but the labourer was embittered by generations of
sordid misery. Very reluctantly the farmers gave way, and generally
speaking wages went up during the agitation to 14s. or 15s. a week,
though Arch himself admits that even during the height of it they were
often only 11s. and 12s. With the bad times, about 1879, wages began
to fall again, and men were leaving the Agricultural Union; by 1882
Arch says many were again taking what the farmer chose to give. From
1884 the Union steadily declined, and after a temporary revival about
1890, practically collapsed in 1894. Other unions had been started,
but were then going down hill, and in 1906 only two remained in a
moribund condition. Their main object, to raise the labourer's wages,
was largely counteracted by the acute depression in agriculture, and
though there has since been considerable recovery, there are districts
in England to-day where he only gets 11s. and 12s. a week.
The Labourers' Union helped to deal a severe blow to the 'gang
system', which had grown up at the beginning of the century (when the
high corn prices led to the breaking up of land where there were no
labourers, so that 'gangs' were collected to cultivate it[664]), by
which overseers, often coarse bullies, employed and sweated gangs
sometimes numbering 60 or 70 persons, including small children, and
women, the latter frequently very bad specimens of their sex. These
gangs went turnip-singling, bean-dropping, weeding &c., while
pea-picking gangs ran to 400 or 500. Though some of these gangs were
properly managed, the system was a bad one, and the Union and the
Education Acts helped its disappearance.
FOOTNOTES:
[613] Cylindrical pipes came in about 1843, though they had been
recommended in 1727 by Switzer.
[614] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (1st series), xxii. 260.
[615] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1890, pp. 1 sq.
[616] Ibid., 1894, pp. 205 sq.
[617] McCombie, _Cattle and Cattle Breeders_, p. 33.
[618] These classes, however, did not comprise all the then known
breeds of live stock.
[619] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1892, pp. 479 sq.
[620] At the show at Birmingham In 1898 there were 22 entries of
Longhorns; in 1899 a Longhorn Cattle Society was established, and the
herd-book resuscitated. More than twenty herds of the breed are now
well established.
[621] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1901, p. 24.
[622] Caird, _English Agriculture in 1850-1_, pp. 252 sq.
[623] Porter, _Progress of the Nation_, p. 142.
[624] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1901, p. 25.
[625] Ibid. 1896, p. 96.
[626] Ibid. (1st ser.), vi. 2.
[627] Ibid. (1st ser.), v. 102.
[628] 1838, 64s. 7d; 1839, 70s. 8d.; 1840, 66s. 4d.; 1841, 64s. 4d.
[629] Tooke, _History of Prices_, iv. 19.
[630] C. Wren Hoskyns, _Agricultural Statistics_, p. 5.
[631] The abnormal prices during the Crimean War cannot fairly be
taken into account. The home and foreign supplies of wheat and flour
from 1839-46 were:--
Home Supplies. Foreign Supplies.
qrs. qrs.
1839-40 4,022,000 1,762,482
1840-1 3,870,648 1,925,241
1841-2 3,626,173 2,985,422
1842-3 5,078,989 2,405,217
1843-4 5,213,454 1,606,912
1844-5 6,664,368 476,190
1845-6 5,699,969 2,732,134
(Tooke, _History of Prices_, iv. 414.)
1844-5 was a very abundant crop, and the threatened repeal of the Corn
Laws induced farmers to send all the corn possible to market.
[632] Tooke, _History of Prices_, iv. 32.
[633] Cobden's Speech, March 12, 1844.
[634] Tooke, _History of Prices_, iv. 142.
[635] From evidence collected by Mr. Austin in the southern counties.
[636] _Progress of Nation_, pp. 137 sq. For the amount imported before
that date, see Appendix 2.
[637] Walpole, _History of England_, iv. 63 sq. Cobden apparently
never contemplated such low prices for corn as have prevailed since
1883. In his speech of March 12, 1844, he mentioned 50s. a quarter as
a probable price under free trade, and he died before the full effect
of foreign competition was felt by the English farmer.
[638] McCulloch, _Commercial Dictionary_, 1847, p. 274. See below, pp.
325 sq.
[639] Caird, _English Agriculture in 1850-1_, p. 498.
[640] Ibid. p. 490.
[641] _Victoria County History: Warwickshire_, ii. 277.
[642] Caird, _op. cit._, p. 481.
[643] Caird, _op. cit._ p. 507.
[644] Hasbach, _op. cit._ pp. 220, 226.
[645] Cobden's Speech, March 12, 1844.
[646] Mr. Pusey, one of the best informed agriculturists of the day,
estimated the produce of wheat per acre in 1840 at 26
bushels.--_R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1890, p. 20.
[647] Caird, _English Farming in 1850-1_, p. 474.
[648] _Progress of the Nation_.
[649] Thorold Rogers, _History of Agriculture and Prices_, v. 29.
[650] _Progress of the Nation_, pp. 137-9.
[651] Yet as the growth of population overtakes the corn and meat
supply, these prophets may in the end prove correct.
[652] The Great Exhibition of 1851 was said to have widely diffused
the use of improved implements.--_R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1856, p. 54.
[653] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1890, p. 34.
[654] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1856, p. 60.
[655] Ibid. 1901, p. 30. See below, p. 343.
[656] _Board of Agriculture Returns_, 1878, and _R.A.S.E. Journal_,
1868, p. 239. Young estimated the number of cattle in England in 1770
at 2,852,048, including 684,491 draught cattle.--_Eastern Tour_, iv.
456.
[657] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, (2nd ser.), ii. 230.
[658] Ibid. iii. 430.
[659] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (2nd ser.), ii. 270.
[660] See _Autobiography of Joseph Arch_.
[661] Ibid. ix. 274.
[662] In many districts, however, his food was better than this.
[663] Hasbach, _op. cit._, pp. 276-7.
[664] Hasbach, _op. cit._, pp. 193, et seq. The Gangs Act (30 & 31
Vict. c. 130) had already brought the system under control.
CHAPTER XXI
1875-1908
AGRICULTURAL DISTRESS AGAIN.--FOREIGN COMPETITION.--AGRICULTURAL
HOLDINGS ACTS.--NEW IMPLEMENTS.--AGRICULTURAL COMMISSIONS.--THE
SITUATION IN 1908
About the year 1875 the good times came to an end. The full force of
free trade was at last felt. The seasons assisted the decline, and
there was now no compensation in the shape of higher prices. In the
eight years between 1874 and 1882 there were only two good crops. A
new and formidable competitor had entered the field; between 1860 and
1880 the produce of wheat in the United States had trebled. Vast
stretches of virgin soil were opened up with the most astonishing
rapidity by railroads, and European immigrants poured in. The cost of
transport fell greatly, and England was flooded with foreign corn and
meat. English land which had to support the landlord, the tithe-owner,
the land agent, the farmer, the labourer, and a large army of
paupers,[665] had to compete with land where often one man was owner,
farmer, and labourer, with no tithe and no poor rates. Yet prices held
up fairly well until 1884, when there was a collapse from which they
have not yet recovered. In 1877 wheat was 56s. 9d., in 1883 41s. 7d.,
and in 1884 35s. 8d.; by 1894 the average price for the year was 22s.
10d.[666]
Farmers' capital was reduced from 30 to 50 per cent., and rents and
the purchase value of land in a similar proportion. Poor clays only
fit for wheat and beans went out of cultivation, though much has since
been laid down to grass, and much has 'tumbled down'. In fact most of
the increased value of the good period between 1853-75 disappeared.
The year 1879 will long be remembered as 'the Black Year'. It was the
worst of a succession of wet seasons in the midland, western and
southern counties of England, the average rainfall being one-fourth
above the average, and 1880 was little better. The land, saturated and
chilled, produced coarser herbage, the finer grasses languished or
were destroyed, fodder and grain were imperfectly matured. Mould and
ergot were prevalent among plants, and flukes producing liver-rot
among live stock, especially sheep. In 1879 in England and Wales
3,000,000 sheep died or were sacrificed from rot,[667] by 1881
5,000,000 had perished at an estimated loss of £10,000,000, and many,
alas! were sent to market full of disease. Cattle also were infected,
and hares, rabbits, and deer suffered. In some cases entire flocks of
sheep disappeared. The disease was naturally worst on low-lying and
ill-drained pastures, but occurred even on the drier uplands hitherto
perfectly free from liver-rot, carried thither no doubt by the
droppings of infected sheep, hares, and rabbits, and perhaps by the
feet of men and animals. Apart from medicine, concentrated dry food
given systematically, the regular use of common salt, and of course
removal from low-lying and damp lands, were found the best
preventives.
Besides this great calamity, this year was distinguished by one of the
worst harvests of the century, outbreaks of foot and mouth disease, of
pleuro-pneumonia, and a disastrous attack of foot-rot. The misfortunes
of the landed interest produced a Commission in 1879 under the Duke of
Richmond, which conducted a most laborious and comprehensive inquiry.
Their report, issued in 1882, stated that they were unanimously
convinced of the great intensity and extent of the distress that had
fallen upon the agricultural community. Owner and occupier had alike
been involved. Yet, though agricultural distress had prevailed over
the whole country, the degree had varied in different counties, and in
some cases in different parts of the same counties. Cheshire, for
instance, had not suffered to anything like the same extent as other
counties, nor was the depression so severe in Cumberland,
Westmoreland, Northumberland, and parts of Yorkshire. The rainfall had
been less in the northern counties. In the midlands, the eastern, and
most of the southern counties the distress was severe, in Essex the
state of agriculture was deplorable, but Kent, Devon, and Cornwall
were not hardly hit.[668]
The chief causes of the depression were said to be these:--
1. The succession of unfavourable seasons, causing crops
deficient in quantity and quality, and losses of live stock.
2. Low prices, partly due to foreign imports and partly to
the inferior quality of the home production.
3. Increased cost of production.
4. Increased pressure of local taxation by the imposition
of new rates, viz. the education rate and the sanitary rate;
and the increase of old rates, especially the highway rate, in
consequence of the abolition of turnpikes. Some exceptionally
bad instances of this were given. In the parish of
Didmarton, Gloucestershire, the average amount of rates paid
for the five years ending March 31, 1858, was £26 6s. 3d.,
for the five years ending March 31, 1878, £118 11s. 7d. In
the Northleach Union the rates had increased thus in decennial
periods from 1850:--
1850-1 £5,471
1860-1 5,534
1870-1 8,525
1878-9 10,089
On one small property in Staffordshire the increase of rates,
other than poor rates, amounted to 3s. 6d. in the £ on the
rateable value.
5. Excessive rates charged by railway companies for the
conveyance of produce, and preferential rates given to foreign
agricultural produce; the railway companies alleging, in defence
of this, that foreign produce was consigned in much greater
bulk, by few consignors, than home grown, and could be conveyed
much more economically than if picked up at different
stations in small quantities.
As to the effect of restrictive covenants on the depression, the
balance of evidence did not incline either way.[669]
The Agricultural Holdings Act of 1875 was stated to have done much
good in the matter of compensation to tenants for improvements,
notwithstanding its merely permissive character, as it had reversed
the presumption of law in relation to improvements effected by the
tenant, prescribed the amount of compensation, and the mode in which
it should be given.
As to the important subject of freedom of cropping and sale of
produce, there were diverse opinions, some advocating it wholly,
others not believing in it at all, others saying each landlord and
each tenant should make their own bargains since each farm stands on
its own footing, others again favouring modified restrictions. The
preponderance of opinion was in favour of a modification of the law of
distress.
The Commission further said that the pressure of foreign competition
was greatly in excess of the anticipations of the supporters and of
the apprehensions of the opponents of Corn Law Repeal; if it had not
been for this, English farmers would have been partly compensated for
the deficient yield by higher prices. On the other hand, the farmer
had had the advantage of an increased and cheapened supply of feeding
stuffs, such as maize, linseed and cotton cakes, and of artificial
manures imported from abroad. At the same time the benefit to the
community from cheap food was immense. It seemed just, however, that
as agriculture was suffering from low prices, by which the country
gained as a whole, that the proportion of taxation imposed on the land
should be lessened; it was especially unjust that personal property
was exempted from local rates, contrary to the Act of 43 Eliz. c. 2,
and the whole burden thrown on real property. The difficulties of
farmers were aggravated by the high price of labour, which had
increased 25 per cent. in twenty years, largely owing to the
competition of other industries, and at the same time become less
efficient. As provisions were cheap, and employment abundant, the
labourer had been scarcely affected by the distress. His cottage,
however, especially if in the hands of a small owner, with neither the
means nor the will to expend money on improvements, was often still
very defective.
Farmers were already complaining of the results of the new system of
education, for which they had to pay, while it deprived them of the
labour of boys, and drained from the land the sources of future labour
by making the young discontented with farm work. The Commission denied
that rents had been unduly raised previous to 1875[670]; and in the
exceptional cases where they had been, it was due to the imprudent
competition of tenant farmers encouraged by advances made by country
bankers, the sudden withdrawal of which had greatly contributed to the
present distress. Districts where dairying was carried on had suffered
least, yet the yield of milk was much diminished, and the quality
deteriorated, owing to the inferiority of grass from a continuance of
wet seasons. The production and sale of milk was increasing largely,
so that the attention of farmers and landlords was being drawn to this
important branch of farming, milk-sellers necessarily suffering less
from foreign competition than any other farmers.
Let us turn once more to the hop yards: in 1878 the acreage of hops in
England reached its maximum. We have seen that in the first half of
the eighteenth century hop yards covered 12,000 acres; which between
1750 and 1780 increased to 25,000, and by 1800 to 32,000. In 1878,
71,789 acres were grown. The great increase prior to that year was due
to the abolition of the excise duty in 1862, which on an average was
equal to an annual charge of nearly £7 an acre.[671] This encouraged
hop-growing more than the taking off of the import duty in the same
year discouraged it. In 1882 there was a very small crop in England,
which raised the average price to £18 10s. a cwt.; some choice samples
fetching £30 a cwt.; growers who had good crops realizing much more
than the freehold value of the hop yards. This, however, was most
unfortunate for them, as it led to a great increase in the use of hop
substitutes, such as quassia, chiretta, colombo, gentian, &c., which,
with the decreasing consumption of beer and the demand for lighter
beer, has done more than foreign competition to lower the price and
thereby cause so large an area to be grubbed up as unprofitable, that
in 1907 it was reduced to 44,938 acres. Yet the quality of the hops
has in the last generation greatly improved in condition, quality, and
appearance. Growers also have in the same period often incurred great
expense in substituting various methods of wire-work for poles; and
washing, generally with quassia chips and soft soap and water, has
become wellnigh universal, so that the expense of growing the crop has
increased, while the price has been falling.[672] The crop has always
been an expensive one to grow; Marshall in 1798 put it at £20 an acre,
exclusive of picking, drying, and marketing[673]; and Young estimated
the total cost at the same date at £31 10s. an acre[674]; to-day £40
an acre is by no means an outside price. It may be some encouragement
to growers to remember that hops have always been subject to great
fluctuations in price; between 1693 and 1700, for instance, they
varied from 40s. to 240s. a cwt., so that they may yet see them at a
remunerative figure. 'Upon the whole', says an eighteenth-century
writer, 'though many have acquired large estates by hops, their real
advantage is perhaps questionable. By engrossing the attention of the
farmer they withdraw him from slower and more certain sources of
wealth, and encourage him to rely too much upon chance for his rent,
rather than the honest labour of the plough. To the landlord the
cultivation of hops is an evil, defrauding the arable land of its
proper quantity of manure and thereby impoverishing his estate.'
It was by this time the general opinion of men with a thorough
experience of farming, that in many parts of Great Britain no
sufficient compensation was secured to the tenant for his unexhausted
improvements. In some counties and districts this compensation was
given by established customs, in others customs existed which were
insufficient, in many they did not exist at all. It must be confessed
that often when a tenant leaves his farm there is more compensation
due to the landlord than to the tenant. Human nature being what it is,
the temptation to get as much out of the land just before leaving it
is wellnigh irresistible to many farmers.
In these days, when the landlord is often called upon by the tenant to
do what the tenant used to do himself, the question of compensation to
the tenant must on many estates appear to the landlord extremely
ironical. It is, in the greater number of cases, the landlord who
should receive compensation, and not the tenant; and though he has
power to demand it, such power is over and over again not put in
force.
At the same time there are bad men in the landlord class as in any
other, and from them the tenant required protection. By the
Agricultural Holdings (England) Act of 1875, 38 & 39 Vict. c. 92,
improvements for which compensation could be claimed by the tenant
were divided into three classes. First class improvements, such as
drainage of land, erection or enlargement of buildings, laying down of
permanent pasture, &c., required the previous consent in writing of
the landlord to entitle the tenant to compensation. Second class
improvements, such as boning of land with undissolved bones, chalking,
claying, liming, and marling the land, the latter now hardly ever
practised, required notice in writing by the tenant to the landlord of
his intention, and if notice to quit had been given or received, the
consent in writing of the landlord was necessary. For third class
improvements, such as the application to the land of purchased manure,
and consumption on the holding by cattle, sheep, or pigs, of cake or
other feeding stuff not produced on the holding, no consent or notice
was required. Improvements in the first class were deemed to be
exhausted in twenty years, in the second in seven, and in the third in
two. It was the opinion of the Richmond Commission of 1879 that,
notwithstanding the beneficial effects of this Act, no sufficient
compensation for his unexhausted improvements was secured to the
tenant.
The landlord and tenant also might agree in writing that the Act
should not apply to their contract of tenancy, so in 1883 when the
Agricultural Holdings Act of that year (46 & 47 Vict. c. 61)[675] was
passed, it was made compulsory as far as regarded compensation, and
the time limit as regards the tenant's claims for improvements was
abolished, the basis for compensation for all improvements recognized
by the Act being laid down as 'the value of the improvement to an
incoming tenant'. Improvements for which compensation could be claimed
were again divided into three classes as before, but the drainage of
land was placed in the second class instead of the first, and so only
required notice to the landlord. This was the only improvement in the
second class; the other improvements which had been in the second
class in the Act of 1875 were now placed in the third, where no
consent or notice was required.
The Act also effected three other important alterations in the law;
first, as to 'Notices to Quit', a year's notice being necessary where
half a year's notice had been sufficient, though this section might be
excluded by agreement; secondly, after January 1, 1885, the landlord
could only distrain for one year's rent instead of six years as
formerly; and thirdly, as to fixtures. These formerly became the
property of the landlord on the determination of the tenancy, but by
14 & 15 Vict. c. 25 an agricultural tenant was enabled to remove
fixtures put up by him with the consent of his landlord for
agricultural purposes. Now all fixtures erected after the commencement
of the Act were the property of and removable by the tenant, but the
landlord might elect to purchase them.
This Act was amended by the Act of 1900 (63 & 64 Vict. 50), and has
been much altered by the Agricultural Holdings Act of 1906 (6 Edw.
VII, c. 56), which has treated the landlord with a degree of severity,
which considering the excellent relations that have for the most part
existed between English landlords and tenants for generations, is
utterly unwarranted. In several respects indeed he has been treated by
the Act as if the land did not belong to him, while freedom of
contract, until recent years one of the most cherished principles of
our law, is arbitrarily interfered with. The chief alterations made by
the Act of 1906 were:--
1. _Improvements._--By the Act of 1883, in the valuation for
improvements under the first schedule, such part of the improvement as
is justly due to the inherent capabilities of the soil was not
credited to the tenant This provision is repealed by the Act of 1906,
in reference to which it must be said that the latent fertility of the
soil, sometimes very considerable, may be developed by a small outlay
on the part of the tenant for which outlay he is certainly entitled to
compensation. But the greater part of the improvement may be due to
the soil which belongs to the landlord, yet the Act credits the tenant
with the whole of this improvement. An addition is made to the list of
improvements which a tenant may make without his landlord's consent
and for which he is entitled on quitting to compensation, viz. repairs
to buildings, being buildings necessary for the proper working of the
holding, other than repairs which the tenant is obliged to execute.
2. _Damage by Game._ A tenant may now claim compensation for damage to
crops by deer, pheasants, partridges, grouse, and black game.
3. _Freedom of Cropping and Disposal of Produce._ Prior to this Act it
had been the custom for generations to insert covenants in agreements
providing for the proper cultivation of the farm; as, for instance,
forbidding the removal from the holding of hay, straw, roots, green
crops, and manure made on the farm. These and other covenants were
merely in the interests of good farming, and to prevent the soil
deteriorating. In recent times vexatious covenants formerly inserted
had practically disappeared, and where still existing were seldom
enforced. By this Act, notwithstanding any custom of the country or
any contract or agreement, the tenant may follow any system of
cropping, and dispose of any of his produce as he pleases, but after
so doing he must make suitable and adequate provision to protect the
farm from injury thereby: a proviso vague and difficult to enforce,
and not sufficient to prevent an unscrupulous tenant greatly injuring
his farm.
4. _Compensation for unreasonable disturbance._ If a landlord without
good cause, and for reasons inconsistent with good estate management,
terminates a tenancy by notice to quit; or refuses to grant a renewal
of the tenancy if so requested at least one year before the expiration
thereof; or if a tenant quits his holding in consequence of a demand
by the landlord for an increased rent, such demand being due to an
increased value in the holding owing to improvements done by the
tenant; in either of such events the tenant is entitled to
compensation.
This compensation for disturbance is in direct opposition to the
recommendation of the Commission of 1894,[676] and seems to be an
unwarrantable interference with the owner's management of his own
land.
Another benefit, and one long needed, was conferred on farmers by the
Ground Game Act of 1880, 43 & 44 Vict., c. 47. Before the Act the
tenant had by common law the exclusive right to the game, including
hares and rabbits, unless it was reserved to the landlord, which was
usually the case. By this Act the right to kill ground game, which
often worked terrible havoc in the tenant's crops, was rendered
inseparable from the occupation of the land, though the owner may
reserve to himself a concurrent right. One consequence of this Act has
been that the hare has disappeared from many parts of England.
The greatest improvement in implements during this period was in the
direction of reaping and mowing machines, which have now attained a
high degree of perfection. As early as 1780 the Society of Arts
offered a gold medal for a reaping machine, but it was not till 1812
that John Common of Denwick, Northumberland, invented a machine which
embodied all the essential principles of the modern reaper. Popular
hostility to the machine was so great that Common made his early
trials by moonlight, and he ceased from working on them.[677] His
machine was improved by the Browns of Alnwick, who sold some numbers
in 1822, and shortly afterwards emigrated to Canada taking with them
models of Common's reapers. McCormick, the reputed inventor of the
reaping machine, knew the Browns, and obtained from them a model of
Common's machine which was almost certainly the father of the famous
machine exhibited by him at the Great Exhibition of 1851. Various
other inventors have assisted in improving this implement, and in 1873
the first wire binder was exhibited in Europe by the American, W.A.
Wood, wire soon giving place to string owing to the outcry of farmers
and millers. The self-binding reaper is the most ingenious of
agricultural machines, and has been of enormous benefit to farmers in
saving labour. Though the hay-tedding machine was invented in 1814 it
is only during the last thirty years that its use has become common,
the spread of the mowing machine making it a necessity, cutting the
grass so fast that only a very large number of men with the old forks
could keep up with it. The tedder also rendered raking by hand too
slow, and the horse-rake, patented first in 1841, has immensely
improved in the last thirty years.
Another enormous labour saver is the hay and straw elevator, having
endless chains furnished with carrying forks at intervals of a few
feet, driven by horse gear. The steam cultivator invented by John
Fowler is much used, but cannot be said to have superseded the
ordinary working stock of the farm, though for deep ploughing on large
farms of heavy land it is invaluable. Improvements in dairying
appliances have also been great, but the English farmer has generally
fought shy of factories or creameries, so that his butter still lacks
the uniform quality of his foreign rivals.
In manures the most important innovation in the last generation has
been the constantly growing use of basic slag, formerly left neglected
at the pit mouth and now generally recognized as a wonderful producer
of clover.
Most of the suggestions of the Commission of 1879 were carried into
effect. Rents were largely reduced, so that between 1880 and 1884 the
annual value of agricultural land in England sank £5,750,000.[678]
Grants were made by the Government in aid of local burdens, cottages
were improved although the landowners' capital was constantly
dwindling, Settled Land Acts assisted the transfer of limited estates,
a Minister of Agriculture was appointed in 1889, and in 1891 the
payment of the tithe was transferred from the tenant to the landlord,
which generally meant that the whole burden was now borne by the
latter.
Still foreign imports continued to pour in and prices to fall. Wheat
land, which was subject to the fiercest competition, began to be
converted to other uses, and between 1878 and 1907 had fallen in
England from 3,041,214 acres to 1,537,208, most of it being converted
to pasture or 'tumbling down' to grass, while a large quantity was
used for oats. The price of live stock was now falling greatly before
increasing imports of live animals and dead meat, while cheese,
butter, wool, and fruit were also pouring in. Farming, too, was now
suffering from a new enemy, gambling in farm produce, which began to
show itself about 1880 and has since materially contributed to
lowering prices.[679] The enormous gold premium in the Argentine
Republic, with the steady fall in silver, was another factor. As Mr.
Prothero says, 'Enterprise gradually weakened, landlords lost their
ability to help, and farmers their recuperative power. The capital
both of landlords and tenants was so reduced that neither could afford
to spend an unnecessary penny. Land deteriorated in condition,
drainage was practically discontinued ... less cake and less manure
were bought, labour bills were reduced, and the number of males
employed in farming dwindled as the wheat area contracted.'[680] The
year 1893 was remarkable for a prolonged drought in the spring; from
March 2 to May 14 hardly any rain fell, and live stock were much
reduced in quality from the parching of the herbage, while in many
parts the difficulty of supplying them with water was immense.
In the same year another Commission on Agriculture was appointed,
whose description of the condition of agriculture was a lamentable
one. The Commission in their final report[681] stated that the seasons
since 1882 had on the whole been satisfactory from an agricultural
point of view, and the evidence brought forward showed that the
existing depression was to be mainly attributed to the fall in prices
of farm produce. This fall had been most marked in the case of grain,
particularly wheat, and wool also had fallen heavily. It was not
surprising therefore to find that the arable counties[682] had
suffered most; in counties where dairying, market gardening, poultry
farming, and other special industries prevailed the distress was less
acute, but no part of the country could be said to have escaped. In
north Devon, noted for stock rearing, rents had only fallen 10 to 15
per cent. since 1881, and in many cases there had been no reduction at
all. In Herefordshire and Worcestershire good grass lands, hop lands,
and dairy farms had maintained their rents in many instances, and the
reductions had apparently seldom exceeded 15 per cent.; on the heavy
arable lands, however, the reduction was from 20 to 40 per cent.
In Cheshire, devoted mainly to dairying, there had been no general
reduction of rent, though there had been remissions, and in some cases
reductions, of 10 per cent.
In fact, grazing and dairy lands, which comprise so large an area of
the northern and western counties, were not badly affected, though the
depreciation in the value of live stock and the fall in wool had
considerably diminished farm profits and rents. But of the eastern
counties, those in which there are still large quantities of arable
land, a different tale was told. In Essex much of the clay land was
going out of cultivation; many farms, after lying derelict for a few
years, were let as grass runs for stock at a nominal rent The rent of
an estate near Chelmsford of 1,418 acres had fallen from £1,314 in
1879 to £415 in 1892, or from 18s. 6d. an acre to 5s. 10d.[683] The
net rental of another had fallen from £7,682 in 1881 to £2,224 in
1892, and the landlord's income from his estate of 13,009 acres in
1892-3 was 1s. an acre. The balance sheet of the estate for the same
year is an eloquent example of the landowner's profits in these
depressed times[684]:
11:12 AM 7/25/2005RECEIPTS.
£ s. d.
Tithe received 798 5 9
Cottage rents 495 8 6
Garden " 213 5 10
Estate " 7,452 14 8
Tithes refunded by tenants 530 15 2
--------------
£9,490 9 11
==============
PAYMENTS.
£ s. d.
Tithe, rates and taxes 2,964 1 9
Rent-charge and fee farm rents 179 0 4
Gates and fencing 8 7 8
Estate repairs and buildings 4,350 12 8
Draining 170 6 1
Brickyard 170 1 8
Management 936 14 7
Insurances 58 11 5
Balance profit 652 13 9
---------------
£9,490 9 11
===============
In the great agricultural county of Lincoln rents had fallen from 30
to 75 per cent.[685] The average amount realized on an acre of wheat
had fallen from £10 6s. 3d. in 1873-7 to £2 18s. 11d. in 1892[686];
and the fall in the price of cattle between 1882 and 1893 was a little
over 30 per cent. Many of the large farmers in Lincolnshire before
1875 had lived in considerable comfort and even luxury, as became men
who had invested large sums, sometimes £20,000, in their business.
They had carriages, hunters, and servants, and gave their children an
excellent start in life. But all this was changed; a day's hunting
occasionally was the utmost they could afford, and wives and daughters
took the work from the servants. The small farmers had suffered more
than the large ones, and the condition of the small freeholders was
said to be deplorable; a fact to be noted by those who think small
holdings a panacea for distress.[687]
Even near Boston, where the soil is favourable for market gardening,
the evidence of the small holder was 'singularly unanimous' as to
their unfortunate condition. The small occupiers were better off than
the freeholders, because their rents had been reduced and they could
leave their farms if they did not pay; but their position was very
unsatisfactory. From the evidence given to the assistant commissioner
it is clear that the small occupier and freeholder could only get on
by working harder and living harder than the labourer. 'We all live
hard and never see fresh meat,' said one. 'We can't afford butcher's
meat,' said another. Another said, 'In the summer I work from 4 a.m.
to 8 p.m., and often do not take more than an hour off for meals. That
is penal servitude, except you have your liberty. A foreman who earns
£1 a week is better off than I am. He has no anxiety, and not half the
work.' These instances could be multiplied many times, so that it is
not surprising that the children of these men have flocked to the
towns.
In Norfolk, 'twenty or thirty years ago, no class connected with the
land held their heads higher' than the farmers. Many of them owned the
whole or a part of the land they farmed, and lived in good style. All
this was now largely changed. 'The typical Norfolk farmer of to-day is
a harassed and hardworking man,' engaged in the struggle to make both
ends meet. Many were ruined.
However, there were farmers who, by skill, enterprise, and careful
management, made their business pay even in these times, such as the
tenant of the farm at Papplewick in Nottinghamshire who gained the
first prize in the Royal Agricultural Society's farm competition in
1888.[688]. This farm consisted of 522 acres, of which only 61 were
grass, but chiefly owing to the trouble taken in growing fine root
crops, a large number of live stock were annually purchased and sold
off, the following balance sheet showing a profit of £3 1s. 0d. per
acre:
DR. £
Rent, tithes, rates, taxes, &c. 278
Wages 387
Purchase of cake, corn, seeds, manure, &c. 688
Purchase of live stock 2,654
-----
£4,007
Profit 1,589
------
£5,596
======
CR. £
Corn, hay, potatoes, and like product sold 655
Live stock, poultry, dairy produce, and wool sold 4,941
------
£5,596
======
The reductions of rents in various counties were estimated thus[689]:
Per cent. Per cent.
Northumberland 20 to 25 Hereford 20 to 30
Cumberland 20 to 40 Somerset 20 to 40
York 10 to 50 Oxford 25 to 50
Lancaster 5 to 30 Suffolk up to 70
Stafford 10 to 25 Essex 25 to 100
Leicester 40 Kent 15 to 100
Nottingham 14 to 50 Hants 25 to 100
Warwick 25 to 60 Wilts 10 to 75
Huntington 40 to 50 Devon 10 to 25
Derby 14 to 25 Cornwall 10 to 100
This large reduction in the rent rolls of landowners has materially
affected their position and weakened their power. Many, indeed, have
been driven from their estates, while others can only live on them by
letting the mansion house and the shooting, and occupying some small
house on the lands they are reluctant to leave. The agricultural
depression, which set in about 1875, may in short be said to have
effected a minor social revolution, and to have completed the ruin of
the old landed aristocracy as a class. The depreciation of their
rents may be judged from the following figures[690]:
Gross annual value of lands, including
tithes, under Schedule A in England. Decrease.
1879-80 1893-4 Amount. Per cent.
£ £ £
48,533,340 36,999,846 11,533,494 23.7
These figures, however, are far from indicating the full extent of
the decline in the rental value of purely agricultural land, as they
include ornamental grounds, gardens, and other properties, and do not
take into account temporary remissions of rent. Sir James Caird, as
early as 1886, estimated the average reduction on agricultural rents
at 30 per cent.
The loss in the capital value of land has inevitably been great from
this reduction in rents, and has been aggravated by the fact that the
confidence of the public in agricultural land as an investment has
been much shaken. In 1875 thirty years' purchase on the gross annual
value of land was the capital value, in 1894 only eighteen years'
purchase; and whereas the capital value of land in the United Kingdom
was in 1875 £2,007,330,000, in 1894 it was £1,001,829,212, a decrease
of 49.6 per cent. Moreover, landlords have incurred increased
expenditure on repairs, drainage, and buildings, and taxation has
grown enormously. On the occupiers of land the effect of the
depression was no less serious, their profits having fallen on an
average 40 per cent.[691] Occupying owners had suffered as much as any
other class, both yeomen who farmed considerable farms and small
freeholders. Many of the former had bought land in the good times when
land was dear and left a large portion of the purchase money on
mortgage, with the result that the interest on the mortgage was now
more than the rent of the land.[692]
They were thus worse off than the tenant farmer, for they paid a
higher rent in the shape of interest; moreover, they could not leave
their land, for it could only be sold at a ruinous loss. The
'statesmen' of Cumberland were weighed down by the same burdens and
their disappearance furthered; for instance, in the parish of Abbey
Quarter, between 1780 and 1812 their number decreased from 51 to 38.
By 1837 it was 30; by 1864, 21; and in 1894 only 9 remained.
The small freeholders were also largely burdened with mortgages, and
even in the Isle of Axholme were said to have suffered more than any
other class; largely because of their passion for acquiring land at
high prices, leaving most of the purchase money on mortgage, and
starting with insufficient capital.
As regards the agricultural labourer, the chief effect of the
depression had been a reduction of the number employed and a
consequent decrease in the regularity of employment. [693]
Their material condition had everywhere improved, though there were
still striking differences in the wages paid in different parts; and
the improvement, though partly due to increased earnings, was mainly
attributable to the cheapening of the necessaries of life.[694] The
great majority of ordinary labourers were hired by the week, except
those boarded in the farm-house, who were generally hired by the year.
Men, also, who looked after the live stock were hired by the year.
Weekly wages ranged from 10s. in Wilts, and Dorset to 18s. in
Lancashire, and averaged 13s. 6d. for the whole country.
The fall in the prices of agricultural produce is best represented in
tabular form:
TRIENNIAL AVERAGE OF BRITISH
WHEAT, BARLEY, AND OATS PER QUARTER.
Wheat. Barley. Oats.
s. d. s. d. s. d.
1876-8 49 9 38 4 25 6
1893-5 24 1 24 0 16 9
Thus wheat had fallen 53 per cent., barley 37, and oats 34.
TRIENNIAL AVERAGE PRICES OF BRITISH CATTLE,
PER STONE OF 8 LB.
Inferior quality. Second quality. First quality.
s. d. s. d. s. d.
1876-8 4 5 5 6 6 0
1893-5 2 8 4 0 4 7
Or a fall of 24 per cent. in the best quality, and 40 per cent. in
inferior grades.
The decline in the prices of all classes of sheep amounted on the
average to from so to 30 per cent., and in the price of wool of from
40 to 50 per cent.; that is, from an average of 1s. 6d. a lb. in
1874-6, to a little over 9d. in 1893-5.
Milk, butter, and cheese were stated to have fallen from 25 to 33 per
cent. between 1874 and 1891, and there had been a further fall since.
In districts, however, near large towns there had been much less
reduction in the price of milk.
This general fall in prices seems to have been directly connected with
the increase of foreign competition.[695] Wheat has been most affected
by this development, and at the date of the Commission the home
production had sunk to 25 per cent. of the total quantity needed for
consumption. Other home-grown cereals had not been similarly
displaced, but the large consumption of maize had affected the price
of feeding barley and oats. As regards meat, while foreign beef and
mutton had seriously affected the price of inferior British grades,
the influence on superior qualities had been much less marked. Foreign
competition had been, on the whole, perhaps more severe in pork than
in other classes of meat, but had been confined mainly to bacon and
hams.
The successful competition of the foreigner in our butter and cheese
markets was attributed mainly to the fact that the dairy industry is
better organized abroad than in Great Britain.
The Commission found that another cause of the depression was the
increased cost of production, not so much from the increase of wages,
as from the smaller amount of work done for a given sum. Where wages
in the previous twenty years had remained stationary, the cost of work
had increased because the labourer did not work so hard or so well as
his forefathers.
The following table[696] is a striking proof of the increased ratio of
the cost of labour to gross profits:
Ratio of
Average cost of
Acreage Period Average annual Average labour
of of gross cost of cost per to gross
County. farm. acct. profit. labour. acre. profits.
£ s. d. £ s. d. s. d. Per cent.
Suffolk 590 1839-43 1,577 13 3 773 11 0 26 2 49.03
1863-67 1,545 0 9 836 9 0 28 4 54.07
1871-75 1,725 0 1 1,026 14 8 35 2 59.48
1890-94 728 10 5 973 1 5 33 0 133.50
On a farm in Wilts., between 1858 and 1893, the ratio of the cost of
labour to gross profits had increased from 47.0 per cent. to 88.3 per
cent.; on one in Hampshire, between 1873 and 1890, from 44.4 per
cent. to 184.3 per cent.; and many similar instances are given,
illustrating very forcibly the economic revolution which has led to
the transfer of a larger share of the produce of the land to the
labourer.
On the other hand, this Commission found, like the last, that the
farmer had derived considerable benefit from the decrease in cost of
cake and artificial manure, while the low price of corn had led to
its being largely used in place of linseed and cotton cakes.
Before leaving the subject of this famous Commission it is well to
state the answer of Sir John Lawes, than whom there was no higher
authority, to the oft-repeated assertion that high farming would
counteract low prices. 'The result of all our experiments,' he said,
'is that the reverse is the case. As you increase your crops so each
bushel after a certain amount costs you more and more ... the last
bushel always costs you more than all the others.' As prices went
lower 'we must contract our farming to what I should call the average
of the seasons'; and in the corn districts, the higher the farmer had
farmed his land by adding manure the worse had been the financial
results.[697]
In 1896 the injustice of the incidence of rates on agricultural land
was partly remedied, the occupier being relieved of half the rates on
the land apart from the buildings, which Act was continued in
1901.[698] But the system is still inequitable, for a farmer who pays
a rent of £240 a year even now probably pays more rates than the
occupier of a house rated at £120 a year. Yet the farmer's income
would very likely not be more than £200 a year, whereas the occupier
of the house rated at £120 might have an income of £2,000 a year.
In 1901 and 1902 Mr. Rider Haggard, following in the footsteps of
Young, Marshall, and Caird, made an agricultural tour through England.
He considered that, after foreign competition, the great danger to
English farming was the lack of labour,[699] for young men and women
were everywhere leaving the country for the towns, attracted by the
nominally high wages, often delusive, and by the glamour of the
pavement. Yet the labourer has come better out of the depression of
the last generation than either landowner or farmer: he is better
housed, better fed, better clothed, better paid, but filled with
discontent. Since Mr. Haggard wrote, however, there seems to be a
reaction, small indeed but still marked, against the townward
movement, and in most places the supply of labour is sufficient. The
quality, however, is almost universally described as inferior; the
labourer takes no pride in his work, and good hedgers, thatchers,
milkers, and men who understand live stock are hard to obtain[700];
and the reason for this is in large measure due to the modern system
of education which keeps a boy from farm work until he is too old to
take to it. His wages to-day in most parts are good; near
manufacturing towns the ordinary farm hand is paid from 18s. to 20s. a
week with extras in harvest, and in purely agricultural districts from
13s. to 15s. a week, often with a cottage rent free at the lower
figure. His cottage has improved vastly, especially on large estates,
though often leaving much to be desired, and the rent usually paid is
£4 or £5 a year, rising to £7 and £8 near large towns. The wise custom
of giving him a garden has spread, and is nearly always found to be
much more helpful than an allotment. The superior or more skilled
workmen,[701] such as the wagoner, stockman, or shepherd, earns in
agricultural counties like Herefordshire from 14s. to 18s. a week, and
in manufacturing counties like Lancashire from 20s. to 22s. a week,
with extras such as 3d. a lamb in lambing time. At the lower wages he
often has a cottage and garden rent free.
The improved methods of cutting and harvesting crops have so enabled
the farmer to economize labour that the once familiar figure of the
Irish labourer with his knee-breeches and tall hat, who came over for
the harvest, has almost disappeared. Women, who formerly shared with
the men most of the farm work, now are little seen in most parts of
England at work in the fields, and are better occupied in attending to
their homes.
The divorce of the labourer from the land by enclosure had early
exercised men's minds, and many efforts were made to remedy this.
About 1836 especially, several landowners in various parts of England
introduced allotments, and the movement spread rapidly, so that in
1893 the Royal Commission on Labour stated that in most places the
supply was equal to or in excess of the demand.[702] However, previous
Allotments and Small Holdings Acts not being considered so successful
as was desired, in 1907 an effort was made to give more effect to the
cry of 'back to the land' by a Small Holdings and Allotments Act[703]
which enables County Councils to purchase land by agreement or take it
on lease, and, if unable to acquire it by agreement, to do so
compulsorily, in order to provide small holdings for persons desiring
to lease them. The County Council may also arrange with any Borough
Council or Urban District Council to act as its agent in providing and
managing small holdings. The duty of supplying allotments rests in the
first instance with the Rural Parish Councils, though if they do not
take proper steps to provide allotments, the County Council may itself
provide them.
It is a praiseworthy effort, though marked by arbitrary methods and
that contempt for the rights of property, provided it belongs to some
one else, that is a characteristic of to-day. That it will succeed
where the small holder has some other trade, and in exceptionally
favoured situations, is very probable; most of the small holders who
were successful before the Act had something to fall back upon: they
were dealers, hawkers, butchers, small tradesmen, &c. There is no
doubt, too, that an allotment helps both the town artisan and the
country labourer to tide over slack times. Whether it will succeed in
planting a rural population on English soil is another matter. It is a
consummation devoutly to be wished, for a country without a sound
reserve of healthy country-people is bound to deteriorate. The small
holder, pure and simple, without any by-industry, has hitherto only
been able to keep his head above water by a life which without
exaggeration may be called one of incessant toil and frequent
privation, such a life as the great mass of our 'febrile factory
element' could not endure. And if there is one tendency more marked
than another in the history of English agriculture, it is the
disappearance of the small holding. In the Middle Ages it is probable
that the average size of a man's farm was 30 acres, with its attendant
waste and wood; since then amalgamation has been almost constant.
It is true that the occupier of a few acres often brings to bear on it
an amount of industry which is greater in proportion than that
bestowed on a large farm; but the large farmer has, as Young pointed
out long ago, very great advantages. He is nearly always a man of
superior intelligence and training. He has more capital, and can buy
and sell in the best markets; he can purchase better stock, and save
labour and the cost of production by using the best machinery. By
buying in large quantities he gets manures, cakes, seeds, &c., better
and cheaper than the small holder.
Besides the small holders who have outside industries to fall back
upon, those who are aided by some exceptionally favourable element in
the soil or climate, or proximity to good markets, should do well. Yet
in the Isle of Axholme, the paradise of small holders, we have seen
that the Commission of 1894 reported that distress was severe. This,
however, seems to have been largely due to the exaggerated land-hunger
in the good times, which induced the tenants to buy lands at too high
a price; and under normal conditions, such as they are now returning
to, the tenants seem to thrive. In this district the preference for
ownership as opposed to tenancy is, in spite of recent experiences,
unqualified, though it is admitted that the best way is to begin by
renting and save enough to buy.[704] The soil is peculiarly favourable
to the production of celery and early potatoes; and large tracts of
land are divided into unfenced strips locally known as 'selions' of
from a quarter of an acre to 3 acres each, cultivated by men who live
in the villages, each having one or more strips, some as much as 20
acres, and it is considered that 10 acres is the smallest area on
which a man can support a family without any other industry to help
him.
Yet in the fen districts and on the marsh lands between Boston and the
east coast of Lincolnshire, where the land is naturally very
productive, many people are making livings out of 5 or 6 acres, mainly
by celery and early potatoes.[705] Other districts adapted naturally
to small holdings are those of Rock and Far Forest, the famous Vale of
Evesham, the Sandy and Biggleswade district of Bedfordshire; Upwey,
Dorset; Calstock and St. Dominick, Cornwall; Wisbech, Cambridgeshire;
and Tiptree, Essex. Apart, however, from by-industries, and
exceptional climate, soil, and situation, the small holding for the
purpose of raising corn and meat, as distinguished from that which is
devoted to dairying, fruit-growing, and market gardening, does not
seem to-day to have much chance of success. If farms were still
self-sufficing, and simply provided food and clothing for the farmer,
the small producer even of corn and meat might do as well as the
larger farmer on a lower scale, but such conditions have gone; all
holdings now are chiefly manufactories of food, and the smaller
manufactory has little chance in competition with the greater.
The example of foreign countries is usually held up to Englishmen in
this connexion, and the argument naturally used is that 'if small
holdings answer in France and Belgium, why can they not do so in
England?' On this point the testimony of Sir John Lawes is worth
quoting.[706] 'In most, if not in all continental countries' he says,
'the success of small holdings depends very materially on whether or
not the soil and the climate are suitable for what may be called
industrial crops: such as tobacco, hops, sugar beet, colza, flax,
hemp, grapes, and other fruit and vegetables; where these conditions
do not exist the condition of the cultivators is such _as would not be
tolerated in this country_.' That is the reason probably why small
holdings, apart from exceptional conditions, do not answer in England;
the Englishman of to-day is not anxious to face the hard and grinding
conditions under which the continental small holder lives.
Since Mr. Haggard's tour the black clouds which have so long lowered
over agriculture have shown signs of lifting. Rents have been adjusted
to a figure at which the farmer has some chance of competing with the
foreigner,[707] though the price of grain keeps wretchedly low; stock
has improved, and there is undoubtedly to-day (1908) a brisker demand
for farms, and in some localities rents have even advanced slightly.
The yeoman--that is, the man who owns and farms his own land, perhaps
the most sound and independent class in the community--has,
unfortunately for England, largely disappeared. Even of those who
remain, some prefer to let their property and rent holdings from
others! It has been noticed that the labourer's lot has improved in
this generation of adversity; and well it might, for his previous
condition was miserable in the extreme. The farmers have suffered
severely, many losing all their capital and becoming farm labourers.
The landlords have suffered most; they have not been able to throw up
their land like the farmer, and until quite recently have watched it
becoming poorer and poorer. The depression, in short, has driven from
their estates many who had owned them for generations. Those who have
survived have usually been men with incomes from other sources than
land, and they have generally deserved well of their country by
keeping their estates in good condition in spite of falling rents and
increasing taxation.
No class of men, indeed, have been more virulently and consistently
abused than the landlords of England, and none with less justice.
There have been many who have forgotten that property has its duties
as well as its rights; they have erred like other men, but as a rule
they play their part well. Even the worst are to some extent obliged
by their very position to be public spirited, for the mere possession
of an estate involves the employment of a number of people in healthy
outdoor occupations which Englishmen to-day so especially need to
counteract the degenerating influences of town life. Many of the great
estates[708] are carried on at a positive loss to their owners, and it
may be doubted whether agricultural property pays the possessor a
return of 2 per cent. per annum; which is as much as to say that the
landlord furnishes the tenant with capital in the form of land at that
rate for the purpose of his business. What other class is content with
such a scanty return? They are often charged with not managing their
estates on business principles, and no charge is worse founded. It
would be a sad day for the tenants on many an estate if they were
managed on commercial lines. One of the first results would be that
many properties would be given up as a dead loss. They could only be
made to pay by raising the rents or cutting down the ever-recurring
expenditure on repairs and buildings which are necessary for the
welfare of the tenants. The Duke of Bedford, in his _Story of a Great
Estate_, has said that the rent has completely disappeared from three
of his estates. On the Thorney and Woburn estates over £750,000 was
spent on new works and permanent improvements alone between 1816 and
1895, and the result, owing to agricultural depression and increased
burdens on the land, was a net loss of £7,000 a year; and every one
with any knowledge of the management of land knows that this is no
isolated case, though it may be on an exceptionally large scale. Where
would many tenants be if commercial principles ruled on rent audit
days? The larger English landlords of to-day are as a rule not
dependent on their rent rolls. To their great advantage, and to the
advantage of their tenants, they generally own other property, so that
they need not regard the land as a commercial investment. They can
therefore support the necessary outlay on a large estate, the capital
expenditure on improvements of all kinds, and thus relieve the tenant
of any expense of this kind. The farms are let at moderate, not rack
rents, such as the tenants can easily pay. Also the landlord can make
large reductions of rent in years of exceptional distress.[709] Rents
are generally collected three months after they are due, a
considerable concession; and even then arrears are numerous, for any
reasonable excuse for being behind with the rent is generously
listened to. It is owing to forbearance in this and other matters that
the relations between landlord and tenant are generally excellent.
Where are the best farm buildings, where the best cottages, where does
the owner carry on a home farm often for the assistance of the tenant
by letting him have the use of entire horses, well-bred bulls, and
rams, if not on the larger estates? The restrictions in leases, so
much decried of late years, were nearly always in the interest of good
farming, and their abolition will lead to the deterioration of many a
holding.
Bacon said, 'Where men of great wealth do stoop to husbandry, it
multiplieth riches exceedingly' and wiser words were never uttered.
Yet these are the men who are singled out for attack by agitators, who
are only listened to because the greater number of modern Englishmen
are ignorant of the land and everything connected with it. At a time
when rents have dwindled, in some cases almost to vanishing point,
taxation has increased, and confiscatory schemes and meddlesome
restrictions have frightened away capital from the land. Many of the
landlords of England would clearly gain by casting off the burden of
their heavily weighted property, but they nearly all stick nobly to
their duty, and hope for that restoration of confidence in the
sanctity of property and of respect for freedom of contract which
would do so much towards the rehabilitation of what is still the
greatest and most important industry in the country.
FOOTNOTES:
[665] And an ever increasing burden of taxation.
[666] See Appendix III.
[667] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1881, pp. 142, 199.
[668] _Parliamentary Reports of Commissioners_, 1882, xiv. pp. 9 sq.
[669] _Parliamentary Reports of Commissioners_, 1882, xiv. 14.
[670] The rise between 1857 and 1878 has been estimated at 20 per
cent., and between 1867 and 1877 at 11-1/2 per cent. Hasbach, _op.
cit._, p. 291.
[671] _R.A.S.E. Journal_, 1890, p. 324.
[672] See infra, p. 330.
[673] _Rural Economy of Southern Counties_, i. 285-6.
[674] _Victoria County History: Hereford, Agriculture_.
[675] In one respect the Act of 1883 restricted the rights of tenants
to compensation, for while the Act of 1875 had expressly reserved the
rights of the parties under 'custom of the country', the Act of 1883
provided that a tenant 'shall not claim compensation by custom or
otherwise than in manner authorized by this Act for any improvement
for which he is entitled to compensation under this Act' (§ 57).
[676] _Parliamentary Reports, Commissioners_ (1897), xv. 96.
[677] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (1892), p. 63.
[678] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (1901), p. 33. Cf. infra, p. 310.
[679] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (1893), p. 286; (1894), p. 677. Sometimes to
artificially raising them.
[680] Ibid. (1901), p. 34.
[681] _Parliamentary Reports, Commissioners_ (1897), xv.
[682] Broadly speaking, the arable section, or eastern group, included
the counties of Bedford, Berks., Bucks, Cambridge, Essex, Hants,
Hertford, Huntingdon, Kent, Leicester, Lincoln, Middlesex, Norfolk,
Northampton, Notts, Oxford, Rutland, Suffolk, Surrey, Sussex, Warwick,
and the East Riding of York; the grass section, or western group,
included the remaining counties.
[683] _Parliamentary Reports, Commissioners_ (1894), xvi. (1), App. B.
ii.
[684] Ibid. App. B. iii.
[685] Ibid. (1895), xvi. 169.
[686] Ibid. p. 164.
[687] _Parliamentary Reports, Commissioners_ (1895), xvi. 187-8.
[688] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (2nd ser.), xxiv. 538
[689] Ibid. (1894), p. 681.
[690] _Parliamentary Reports, Commissioners_ (1897), xv. 22. Cf. p.
319 n.
[691] Ibid. pp. 30-1.
[692] _Parliamentary Reports, Commissioners_ (1897), xv. 31.
[693] Ibid. p. 37:
NUMBER OF AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS
IN ENGLAND AND WALES.
1871. 1881. 1891. 1901.
996,642 890,174 798,912 595,702
The figures for 1901 are from Summary Tables, _Parliamentary Blue
Book_ (C, d. 1, 523), p. 202, Table xxxvi.
[694] According to the Report of the Royal Commission on Labour,
1893-4, the labourer was 'better fed, better dressed, his education
and language improved, his amusements less gross, his cottage
generally improved, though generally on small estates there were many
bad ones still'.--_Parliamentary Reports_, 1893, xxxv. Index 5 et seq.
[695] _Parliamentary Reports, Commissioners_ (1897), xv. 53, 85. Sir
Robert Giffen suggested that the decline in the price of wheat pay be
partly attributed to the great increase in the supply and consumption
of meat.
[696] _Parliamentary Reports, Commissioners_ (1897), xv. App. iii.
Table viii. From an examination of the accounts of seventy-seven
farms, the average expenditure on labour was found to be 31.4 per
cent. of the total outlay.
[697] _Parliamentary Reports, Commissioners_ (1897), xv. 106. But see
above, p. 271.
[698] 59 & 60 Vict., c. 16; I Edw. VII, c. 13.
[699] _Rural England_, ii. 539. Yet the census returns of 1871, 1881,
and 1891 gave no support to the idea that _young_ men were leaving
agriculture for the towns. See _Parl. Reports_ (1893), xxxviii. (2)
33.
[700] The author speaks from information derived from answers to
questions addressed to landowners, farmers, and agents in many parts
of England, to whom he is greatly indebted.
[701] It is, however, a fallacy to assume, as is nearly always done,
that the ordinary farm labourer, at all events of the old type, is
unskilled. A good man, who can plough well, thatch, hedge, ditch, and
do the innumerable tasks required on a farm efficiently, is a much
more skilled worker than many who are so called in the towns.
[702] _Parl. Reports_ (1893), xxxv. Index.
[703] 7 Edw. VII, c. 54, amending the Allotments Acts of 1887 and 1890
and the Small Holdings Act of 1892. The Allotments Act of 1887 defined
an 'allotment' as any parcel of land of not more than 2 acres held by
a tenant under a landlord; but for the purposes of the Acts of 1892
and 1907 a 'small holding' means an agricultural holding which exceeds
one acre and either does not exceed 50 acres or, if exceeding 50
acres, is of an annual value not exceeding £50. At the same time the
Act defines an allotment as a holding of any size up to 5 acres, so
that up to that size a parcel of land may be treated as a small
holding or an allotment.
[704] Jebb, _Small Holdings_, p. 25.
[705] Jebb, _op. cit._, p. 28.
[706] _Allotments and Small Holdings_ (1892), p. 19 et seq.
[707] The gross income derived from the ownership of lands in Great
Britain, as returned under Schedule A of the Income Tax, decreased
from £51,811,234 in 1876-7 to £36,609,884 in 1905-6. In 1850 Caird
estimated the rental of English land, exclusive of Middlesex, at
£37,412,000. Cf. above, p. 310.
[708] According to the Commission of 1894, the amount expended on
improvements and repairs alone on some great estates was: On Lord
Derby's, in Lancashire, of 43,217 acres, £200,000 in twelve years, or
£16,500, or 7s. 8d. an acre, each year. On Lord Sefton's, of 18,000
acres, £286,000 in twenty-two years, or about £13,000, or 14s. an
acre, each year. On the Earl of Ancaster's estates in Lincolnshire, of
53,993 acres, £689,000 was spent in twelve years, or 11s. 7d. an acre
each year; and many similar instances are given.--_Parliamentary
Reports, Commissioners_ (1897), xv. 287-9.
[709] Shaw Lefevre, _Agrarian Tenures_, p. 19.
CHAPTER XXII
It is a curious fact that the barriers which protected the British
farmer were thrown down shortly before he became by unforeseen causes
exposed to the competition of the whole world. Down to 1846 Germany
supplied more than half the wheat that was imported into England,
Denmark sent more than Russia, and the United States hardly any.
Other competitors who have since arisen were then unknown. By the end
of the next decade Russia and the United States sent large
quantities, as may be gathered from the following table [710]:
ANNUAL AVERAGE IMPORTS OF WHEAT AND FLOUR FOR
THE SEVEN YEARS 1859-1865.
Cwt.
Russia 5,350,861
Denmark and the Duchies 969,890
Germany 6,358,229
France 3,828,691
Spain 331,463
Wallachia and Moldavia 295,475
Turkish dominions, not otherwise specified 528,568
Egypt 1,423,193
Canada 2,223,809
United States 10,080,911
Other countries 1,036,968
In the years 1871-5 the United States held the first place, Russia
came next, and Germany third with only about one-sixth of the
American imports, and Canada was running Germany close. Other
formidable competitors were now arising, and by 1901 the chief
importing countries[711] were:
Cwt.
Argentina 8,309,706
Russia[712] 2,580,805
United States of America 66,855,025
Australia 6,197,019
Canada 8,577,960
India 3,341,500
Since then the imports of wheat and flour from the United States have
decreased, and in 1904 India took the first place, Russia the second,
Argentina the third, and the United States the fourth. However, in
1907 the United States sent more than any other country, followed by
Argentina, India, Canada, Russia, and Australia, in the order named.
It is probable in the near future that the imports from the United
States will decline considerably, for in the last quarter of a
century its population has increased 68 per cent. and its wheat area
only 25 per cent. On the other hand, the population of Canada
increased 33 per cent. and her wheat area 158 per cent. in the same
time; while in Argentina an addition of 70 per cent. to the
population has been accompanied by an increase of the wheat area from
half a million to fourteen million acres. It is probable also that
India and Australia will continue to send large supplies, and there
are said to be vast wheat-growing tracts opened up by the Siberian
Railway, so that there seems little chance of wheat rising very much
in price for many years to come, apart from exceptional causes such
as bad seasons and 'corners'.
McCulloch, writing in 1843,[713] says that, except Denmark and
Ireland, no country of Western Europe 'has been in the habit of
exporting cattle'. Danish cattle, however, could rarely be sold in
London at a profit, and Irish cattle alone disturbed the equanimity
of the English farmer.
For a few years after the repeal of the corn laws and of the
prohibition of imports of live stock, the imports of live stock, meat,
and dairy produce were, except from Ireland, almost nil[714]; since
then they have increased enormously, and in 1907 the value of live
cattle, sheep, and pigs imported was £8,273,640, not so great,
however, as some years before, owing to restrictions imposed; but this
decrease has been made up by the increase in the imports of meat,
which in 1907 touched their highest figure of 18.751,555 cwt, valued
at the large sum of £41,697,905.[715]
Forty years ago hardly any foreign butter or cheese was imported;
to-day it is perhaps no exaggeration to say that not one hundredth
part of the butter eaten in London is British; in 1907 the amount of
butter imported was 4,310,156 cwt., and of cheese, 2,372,233 cwt. The
increase in the imports was largely assisted by the fact that in the
last half of the nineteenth century English farmers had directed their
attention chiefly to meat-producing animals and neglected the milch
cow. However, of late years great efforts have been made to recover
lost ground, and in England the number of cows and heifers in milk or
in calf has increased from 1,567,789 in 1878 to 2,020,340 in 1906.
The regulation of the imports and exports of live stock did not
concern the legislature so early as those of corn. One of the earliest
statutes on the subject is II Hen. VII, c. 13, which forbade the
export of horses and of mares worth more than 6s. 8d., because many
had been conveyed out of the land, so that there were few left for its
defence and the price of horses had been thereby increased. A
subsequent statute, 22 Hen. VIII, c. 7, says this law was disobeyed by
many who secretly exported horses, so it was enacted that no one
should export a horse without a licence; and 1 Edw. VI, c. 5,
continued this. But after this date the export of horses does not seem
to have occupied the attention of Parliament.
22 Hen. VIII, c. 7, also forbade the export of cattle and sheep
without a licence because so many had been carried out of the realm
that victual was scarce and cattle dear. By 22 Car. II, c. 13, oxen
might be exported on payment of a duty of 1s. each, the last statute
on the subject.
As for sheep, their export without the king's licence had been
forbidden by 3 Hen. VI, c. 2, because men had been in the habit of
taking them to Flanders and other countries, where they sheared them
and sold the wool and the mutton. 8 Eliz., c. 3, forbade their export,
and 13 and 14 Car. II, c. 18, declared the export of sheep and wool a
felony.
The importation of cattle was forbidden by 15 Car. II, c. 7, which
stated that the 'comeing in of late of vast numbers of cattle already
fatted' had caused 'a very great part of the land of this kingdom to
be much fallen and like dayly to fall more in their rents and values';
therefore every head of great cattle imported was to pay 20s. to the
king, 10s. to the informer, and 10s. to the poor after July 1, 1664.
By 18 Car. II, c. 2, the importation of cattle was declared a common
nuisance, and if any cattle, sheep, or swine were imported they were
to be seized and forfeited. By 32 Car. II, c. 2, this was made
perpetual and continued in force till 1842, though it was repealed as
to Ireland, as we have seen.[716]
It appears from the laws dealing with the matter that in the time of
the Plantagenets England exported butter and cheese. In the reign of
Edward III they were merchandise of the staple, and therefore when
exported had to go to Calais when the staple was fixed there. This
caused great damage, it is said, to divers persons in England, for the
butter and cheese would not keep until buyers came; therefore 3 Hen.
VI, c 4, enacted that the chancellor might grant licence to export
butter and cheese to other places than to the staple.
The regulation of the export of wool frequently occupied the attention
of Parliament It has been noticed[717] that the laws of Edgar fixed
its price for export, and Henry of Huntingdon mentions its export in
the twelfth century, while during the reign of Edward I it was for
some time forbidden except by licence, which led to its being smuggled
out in wine casks.[718] The _Hundred Rolls_ give the names of several
Italian merchants who were engaged in buying wool for export, the
ecclesiastical houses, especially the Cistercians, furnishing a great
quantity, and the chief port then for the wool trade was Boston, The
export was again prohibited in 1337, the great object being to make
the foreigner pay dearly for our staple product: an object which was
certainly effected, for when Queen Philippa redeemed her crown from
pawn at Cologne in 1342 by a quantity of English wool, 1s. 3-1/2d. a
lb. was the price, and it was even said to sell in Flanders at 3s. a
lb., a price which, expressed in modern money, seems fabulous.[719]
However, in the next reign English wool began to decline in price,
owing probably to changes in fashion, but the long wools maintained
their superiority and their export was forbidden by Henry VI and
Elizabeth.[720]
In the reign of James I it was confessed 'that the cloth of this
kingdom hath wanted both estimation and vent in foreign parts, and
that the wools are fallen from their stated values', so that export
was prohibited entirely; and 13 and 14 Car. II, c. 18, declared the
export of wool a felony, though 7 and 8 Will. III, c. 28, says this
did not deter people from exporting it, so that the law was made more
stringent on the subject, and export continued to be forbidden until
1825.[721] In a letter written in 1677 the fall of rents in England,
which had caused the value of estates to sink from twenty-one to
sixteen or seventeen years' purchase, is ascribed mainly to the low
price of wool,[722] owing to the prohibition of export and increased
imports from Ireland and Spain. It was now, said the writer, worth 7d.
instead of 12d., and a great quantity of Spanish wool was being sold
in England at low rates. These 'low rates' were 2s. and 2s. 2d. a lb.
for the best wool, whereas in 1660 the best Spanish wool was 4s. and
4s. 2d. a lb.
We have seen[723] that Spanish wool was imported into England in the
Middle Ages. In 1677, according to Smith,[724] England imported 2,000
bags of 200 lb. each from Spain[725]; in the three years 1709-11,
14,000 bags; in the three years 1713-14, 20,000 bags; and about 1730
some came from Jamaica, Maryland, and Virginia, and down to 1802
imports were free.[726] In that year a duty of 5s. 3d. a cwt. was
imposed, which in 1819 was raised to 56s. a cwt., which, however, was
reduced to 1d. a lb. on 1s. wool and 1/2d. a lb. on wool under 1s. in
1824. In 1825 colonial wool was admitted free, and in 1844 the duty
taken off altogether, and imports from our colonies and foreign
countries soon assumed enormous proportions. Down to 1814 nearly all
our imports of wool came from Spain; after that the greater part came
from Germany and the East Indies; but Russia and India soon began to
send large quantities, and in recent times Australasia has been our
chief importer, in 1907 sending 321,470,554 lb., while New Zealand
sent 158,406,255 lb. out of a total import of 764,286,625 lb. About
1800 our imports of wool were 8,609,368 lb.![727] Of our enormous
imports of wool, however, a very large quantity is re-exported.
In 1828 it was stated before the House of Lords that English wool had
deteriorated considerably during the previous thirty years, owing
chiefly to the farmer increasing the weight of the carcase and the
quantity of wool, so that fineness of fleece was injured. The great
extension of turnips and the introduction of a large breed of sheep
also appeared to have lessened the value of the fleece, yet English
wool to-day still commands a high price in comparison with that of
other countries, though the price in recent years has declined
greatly; in 1871 it was 1s. 5-1/2d. a lb., in 1872 1s. 9-1/2d., in
1873 1s. 7d. In 1907 Leicester wool was 12-1/2d., Southdown 14d. to
15d., and Lincoln 12d. a lb.; Australian at the same date being 11d.,
and New Zealand 11-1/2d.
The fruit-grower has also had to contend with an enormous foreign
supply, which nearly always has a better appearance than that grown in
these islands, though the quality is often inferior. In 1860 apples
were included with other raw fruits in the returns, so that the exact
figures are not given, but apparently about 500,000 cwt. came in; by
1903 this had increased to 4,569,546 bushels, and in 1907 3,526,232
bushels arrived. Enormous foreign supplies of grapes, pears, plums,
cherries, and even strawberries have also combined to keep the home
price down.
The decrease in the acreage of hops, from its maximum of 71,789 acres
in 1878 to 44,938 in 1907, was ascribed by the recent Commission to
the lessening demand for beer in England, the demand for lighter kinds
of beer, and the use of hop substitutes, and not to increase in
foreign competition; which the following figures seem to bear out:
IMPORTS OF HOPS.
Cwt.
1861 149,176
1867 296,117
1869 322,515
1870 127,853
1875 256,444
1877 (the year before the record acreage planted) 250,039
1879 262,765
1903 113,998
1904 313,667
1905 108,953
1906 232,619
1907 202,324
In recent years they have been a loss to the grower; as the average
crop is a little under 9 cwt. per acre, and the total cost of growing
and marketing from £35 to £45 an acre, it is obvious that prices of
about £3 per cwt., which have ruled lately, are unremunerative.
However disastrous to the farmer and landowner, the increased
quantities and low prices of food thus obtained have been of
inestimable benefit to the crowded population of England. In 1851 the
whole corn supply, both English and foreign, afforded 317 lb. per
annum per head of the population of 27 millions. In 1889 the total
supply gave 400 lb. per head to a population of 37-1/2 millions at a
greatly reduced cost.[728] The supply of animal food presents similar
contrasts; in 1851 each person obtained 90 lb., in 1889 115 lb. The
average value of the imports of food per head in the period 1859-65
was about 25s.; in the period 1901-7, 65s.[729] The products which
have stood best against foreign competition are fresh milk, hay and
straw, the softer kinds of fruit that will not bear carriage well, and
stock of the finest quality. These islands still maintain their great
reputation for the excellent quality of their live stock, and exports,
chiefly of pedigree animals, touched their highest figure in 1906:
Average per
No. Total Value. head.
£ £
Cattle 5,616 327,335 58
Sheep 12,716 204,061 16
Pigs 2,221 20,292 9
1877.[730]
Acreage under crops and
grass in England 24,312,033
_Corn crops._
Wheat 2,987,129
Barley or bere 2,000,531
Oats 1,489,999
Rye 48,604
Beans 470,153
Peas 306,356
---------
Total 7,302,772
_Green crops._
Potatoes 303,964
Turnips and swedes 1,495,885
Mangels 348,289
Carrots 14,445
Cabbage, kohl rabi, and rape 176,218
Vetches and other green crops 420,373
---------
Total 2,759,174
Flax 7,210
Hops 71,239
Barefallow or uncropped arable 576,235
Clover, sainfoin, and
grasses under rotation 2,737,387
----------
Total arable 13,454,017
Permanent grass, exclusive
of mountain or heath land 10,858,016
----------
24,312,033
1907.
Total acreage under
crops and grass 24,585,455
_Corn crops._
Wheat 1,537,208
Barley 1,411,163
Oats 1,967,682
Rye 53,837
Beans 296,186
Peas 164,326
-----------
Total 5,430,402
Potatoes 381,891
Turnips and swedes 1,058,292
Mangels 436,193
Cabbage 65,262
Kohl rabi 20,572
Rape 79,913
Vetches or tares 145,067
Lucerne 63,379
Hops 44,938
Small fruit 73,372
Clover, sainfoin, and
grasses under rotation 2,611,722
Other crops 117,914
Bare fallow 248,678
----------
Total arable 10,777,595
Permanent grass 13,807,860
----------
24,585,455
The small fruit was divided into:
Strawberries 23,623
Raspberries 6,479-1/2
Currants and gooseberries 24,178-3/4
Others 19,090
---------------
73,371-1/4
As arable land has suffered much more than grass from foreign
imports, it was inevitable that this country should become more
pastoral; in 1877 the arable land of England amounted to 13,454,017
acres, and permanent grass to 10,858,016. By 1907 this was
practically reversed, the permanent grass amounting to 13,807,860
acres and the arable to 10,777,595. In corn crops the great decrease
has been in the acreage of wheat, but barley, beans, and peas have
also diminished, while oats have increased. In green crops there has
been a great decrease in turnips and swedes, compensated to some
extent by an increase in mangels, and a sad decrease in hops. The
changes in thirty years can be gathered from the tables of the Board
of Agriculture given on p. 331.
In 1877 no separate return of small fruit was made, but in 1878 the
orchards of England, including fruit trees of any kind, covered
161,228 acres, which by 1907 had grown to a total area under fruit of
294,910 acres, among which were 168,576 acres of apples, 8,365 of
pears, 11,952 of cherries, and 14,571 of plums. Much of the small
fruit is included in the orchards.
'Other crops' were further divided into:
Acres.
Carrots 11,897
Onions 3,416
Buckwheat 5,226
Flax 355
Others 97,020
-------
117,914
The average yield per acre of various crops in England for the ten
years 1897-1906 was:
Bushels.
Wheat 31.1[731]
Barley 32.88
Oats 41.38
Beans 29.28
Peas 27.15
Tons.
Potatoes 5.74
Turnips and swedes 12.19
Mangels 19.24
Cwt.
Hay from clover, and grasses under rotation 29.40
Hay from permanent grass 24.33
Hops 8.81
The live stock in 1877 consisted of:
Horses used solely for purposes of agriculture 761,089
Unbroken horses and mares kept solely for breeding 309,119
---------
1,070,208
---------
Cattle. Cows and heifers in milk or in calf 1,557,574
Two years old and over 1,072,407
Under two years of age 1,349,669
---------
3,979,650
---------
Sheep 18,330,377
Pigs 2,114,751
In 1907:
Horses used solely for agriculture 863,817
Unbroken 325,330
---------
1,189,147
---------
Cattle. Cows and heifers in milk or in calf 2,032,284
Two years old and over 1,043,034
Under two years of age 1,912,413
---------
4,987,731
---------
Sheep[732] 15,098,928
Pigs 2,257,136
The decrease in sheep and the increase in cattle and horses (though
of late years the latter have shown a tendency to decrease) are to be
noted.
The number of live stock per 1,000 acres of cultivated land in the
United Kingdom and other countries is:
Country. Cattle. Sheep. Pigs. Total.
United Kingdom 247 619 76 942
Belgium 411 54 240 705
Denmark 264 126 209 599
France 167 207 88 462
Germany 221 90 216 527
Holland 322 116 164 602
It will be observed that in cattle the United Kingdom comes out
badly, but is pre-eminent in sheep and has the largest total; though,
as cattle require more acreage, Belgium nearly equals its aggregate
produce for 1,000 acres.
As regards prices at the two periods 1871-5 and 1906-7, if we take
100 as the price at the former the following are the prices at the
latter:
Beef 71
Mutton 93
Bacon 121
Wheat 56
Butter 97
Cheese 100
Turning once more to the occupation of land, the percentage of land
occupied by owners in 1907 in England was 12.4, the rest being
occupied by tenants, and the following is a statement of the number
of agricultural holdings of various sizes in 1875 and 1907:
1875.[733]
50 acres 50 to 100 to 300 to 500 to Above
and 100 300 500 1,000 1,000
under. acres. acres. acres. acres. acres.
293,469 44,842 58,450 11,245 3,871 463
1907.
Above 1 and Above 5 and Above 50 and Above
not exceeding not exceeding not exceeding 300
5 acres. 50 acres. 300 acres. acres.
80,921 165,975 109,927 14,652
FOOTNOTES:
[710] McCulloch, _Commercial Dictionary_ (1882), p. 449.
[711] See _Returns of the Board of Agriculture_.
[712] The imports from Russia were that year exceptionally small.
[713] McCulloch, _Commercial Dictionary_ (1852), p. 274.
[714] In 1860 the number of live cattle imported was 104,569; in 1897,
618,321; in 1907, 472,015.
[715] In 1860 the quantity of beef imported was 283,332 cwt.; in 1907,
6,033,736 cwt.
[716] See above.
[717] Supra, p. 38.
[718] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, i. 176, 192; _Hundred
Rolls_, i. 405, 414.
[719] Burnley, _History of Wool_, p. 65.
[720] Ibid. p. 70.
[721] Cf. supra, p. 172.
[722] Smith, _Memoirs of Wool_, i. 222.
[723] See above.
[724] Smith, _Memoirs of Wool_, ii. 252.
[725] McPherson, _Annals of Commerce_, iii. 156.
[726] McCulloch, _Commercial Dictionary_, p. 1431. For imports see
Appendix, p. 354.
[727] Of which 6,000,000 lb. came from Spain. The first Spanish Merino
sheep were introduced into Australia in 1797. See Cunningham,
_Industry and Commerce_, ii. 538, and cf. below.
[728] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (1890), p. 29.
[729] _Board of Agriculture Returns_ (1907), p. 187.
[730] Cf. Appendix IV.
[731] In 1907 the average wheat crop was 33.96 bushels per acre in
England and 39.18 in Scotland. The average yield per acre of wheat in
Holland is 34.1 bushels; Belgium, 34; Germany, 30.3; Denmark, 28.2
France, 197.
[732] The total number of sheep in Great Britain in 1877 was
28,161,164; in 1907, 26,115,455. In 1688 Youatt estimates it at
12,000,000; In 1741, 17,000,000; in 1800 26,000,000; in 1830
32,000,000.
[733] Unfortunately the class 50 acres and under at this time included
holdings _under_ one acre, so that it is useless for the comparison of
the number of small holdings at the two dates, for in 1907 none appear
under one acre.
CHAPTER XXIII
MODERN FARM LIVE STOCK
CART HORSES
Arthur Young at the end of the eighteenth century found only two
kinds of cart horses worthy of mention, the Shire and the Suffolk
Punch; to-day, besides these two, we have the Clydesdale.
The Shire horse, according to Sir Walter Gilbey, is the purest
survival of the Great Horse of mediaeval times, known also as the War
Horse, and the Old English Black Horse. It is the largest of draught
horses, attaining a height of 17 to 17.3 hands and a weight of 2,200
lb., its general characteristics being immense strength, symmetrical
proportions, bold free action, and docile disposition. In 1878 the
Shire Horse Society was established to improve the breed, and
distribute sound and healthy sires through the country.
The Clydesdale, whose native home is the valley of the Clyde, is not
so large as the Shire, but strong, active, and a fine worker. They
are either derived from a cross between Flemish stallions and
Lanarkshire mares, or are an improvement of the old Lanark breed.[734]
The Suffolk Punch looks what he is-a thorough farm horse. He stands
lower than the two former breeds, but weighs heavily, often 2,000 lb.
They are generally chestnut or light dun in colour, and their legs
are without the feather of the Clydesdale and Shire. They have been
long associated with Suffolk, and were mentioned by Camden in 1586.
According to the Suffolk _Stud Book_ of 1880, the Suffolk horses
of to-day are with few exceptions the descendants in the direct male
line of the original breed described by Arthur Young.
CATTLE
What was the original breed of cattle in this island is uncertain. The
Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in
1887 favours the view that the herds of wild cattle, such as still
exist at Chillingham, represent the original breed of Great Britain.
It states that the 'urus' was the only indigenous wild ox in this
country, and the source of all our domesticated breeds as well as of
the few wild ones that remain, such as the Chillingham breed, which is
small, white, with the inside of the ear red, and a brownish muzzle.
Some, however, assert they are merely the descendants of a
domesticated breed run wild, which have reverted somewhat to the
ancient type.[735]
According to Thorold Rogers, the cattle of the Middle Ages were small
rough animals like the mountain breeds of to-day, and at the end of
the sixteenth century we have seen they had large horns, were low and
heavy, and for the most part black.[736] The great variety of cattle
in Great Britain may be due to their being the descendants of several
species, or to difference of climate and soil, or to spontaneous
variation, but the chief cause is the diligent selection of breeders.
Marshall is quite positive[737] that the Hereford, Devon, Sussex, and
the black mountain breeds of Scotland and Wales are all descended from
the original native breed of this island, that the Shorthorns came
from the Continent, and the Longhorns probably from Ireland. Bradley's
division of cattle into black, white, and red tells us little.[738]
There was very little attempt at improvement until the middle of the
eighteenth century, for peace was necessary for long continued
effort, and 1746, the date of Culloden, the last battle fought on
British soil, may be taken practically as the commencement of the era
of progress.
The Shorthorn is the most famous and widely-spread breed of this
country, if not in the world; it exceeds in number any other breed in
the United Kingdom, and most cross-breds have Shorthorn blood in them.
It adapts itself to any climate, and is equally noted for beef-making
and milk-yielding.
The origin of the Shorthorns is uncertain; they originated from the
Teeswater and Holderness varieties, but where these came from is a
matter of dispute. Young, in his _Northern Tour_,[739] says, 'In
Yorkshire the common breed was the short-horned kind of cattle called
Holderness, but really the Dutch sort'; and many have said the
Holderness and the Teeswater breeds both came from Holland, and were
practically the same, while others assert the original home of the
Teeswaters was the West Highlands.[740]
John Lawrence speaks of the Dutch breed with short horns in 1726;[741]
but, unless they were smuggled over, it certainly seems strange that
any Dutch cattle should have been imported in the eighteenth century,
for the importation of cattle was strictly forbidden during the whole
century. It was George Culley's opinion that they came from Holland,
because few were found except along the eastern coast; he also knew
farmers who went over to Holland to buy bulls.[742]
Be this as it may, it was the cattle of the Teeswater district in
Durham that the Collings improved, and they are still called Durhams
in many parts. The work of the Collings[743] was carried on by Thomas
Booth, who farmed his own estate of Killerby in Yorkshire, where he
turned his attention to Shorthorns about 1790, and by 1814 he was as
well known as the Collings. He improved the Shorthorns by reducing the
bone, especially the length and coarseness of the legs, the too
prominent hips, and the heavy shoulder bones. In 1819 he removed to
Warlaby, and died there in 1835, having given up the Killerby estate
to his son John, who with his brother Richard ably sustained their
father's reputation. 'Booth strains' equally with 'Bates strains', the
results of the work of Bates of Kirkleavington, whose cattle we have
seen at the Oxford Show in 1839, and whose herd was dispersed in 1850,
have been the foundation of many famous herds, and can be traced in
many a pedigree animal of to-day.
The palmy days of the Shorthorns were the 'seventies' of the last
century, when they made fabulous prices. At the great sale at New York
Mills, in 1873, eleven females of the Duchess tribe averaged £4,522
14s. 2d., and one cow sold for £8,458 6s. 8d. In 1877 Mr. Loder bought
Third Duchess of Hillhurst for 4,100 guineas; in 1876 Lord Bective
gave 4,300 guineas for Fifth Duchess of Hillhurst, then 16 months old;
and in 1875 the bull Duke of Connaught sold for 4,500 guineas. It was
not likely that with the advent of bad times these prices would
continue, and nothing like them in the Shorthorn world has occurred
since.
_Herefords._[744]
Herefordshire cattle have long been famous as one of the finest
breeds in the world. Marshall, writing in 1788, does not hesitate to
say, 'The Herefordshire breed of cattle, taking it all in all, may
without risque be deemed the first breed of cattle in the land.'
Their origin has been accounted for in various ways. Some say they
were originally brown or reddish-brown from Normandy or Devon, others
that they came from Wales, while it is recorded that Lord Scudamore
in the latter half of the seventeenth century introduced red cows
with white faces from Flanders. However, they do not emerge from
obscurity until about the middle of the eighteenth century, when
Messrs. Tomkins, Weyman, Yeomans, Hewer, and Tully devoted their
energies to establishing a county breed. There were four varieties of
Herefords, which have now practically merged into the red with white
face, mane, and throat: the mottle face, with red marks intermixed
with the parts usually white; the dark greys; light greys; and the
red with the white face. The rivalry between the breeders of the
white and the mottle faces almost caused the failure of the Herd-Book
commenced in 1845 by Mr. Eyton. The mottle-faced party seems to have
been then the most influential, but the dark and light grey varieties
also had strong adherents. In 1857 Mr. Duckham took over the
management of the Herd-Book, and to his exertions the breed owes a
deep debt of gratitude. One of the greatest supporters of the
Herefordshire breed was Mr. Westcar of Creslow, who, starting in
1779, attended Hereford October Fair for forty years, and when the
Smithfield Show commenced in 1799 won innumerable first prizes there
with Herefordshire cattle. Between 1799 and 1811 twenty of his
Herefordshire prize oxen averaged £106 6s. each, and at the sale of
Mr. Ben Tomkins's herd after his death in 1819 twenty-eight breeding
animals averaged £152, one cow fetching £262 15s. Herefords are
famous for their feeding qualities at grass, and good stores are
scarce, the best being fattened on their native pastures. They are
not only almost the only breed in their own county, but few English
counties south of Shropshire are without them; they have done well in
Ireland, and in Canada, the United States, South America, and
Australia have attained great success. They are not so well qualified
for crossing as Shorthorns, but have blended well with that breed,
and produced good crosses with Ayrshires and Jerseys, but not with
Devons. It has been said that they are not a favourite sort with
London butchers, as they require time to ripen, which does not suit a
hurrying age. Hence they probably flourished best under the old
school of graziers, who sometimes kept them to six or seven years
old. At all events they are a very fine breed for beef purposes,
their meat being particularly tender, juicy, and fine-grained. They
are seldom kept for dairy purposes, being poor milkers; consequently
the calf is nearly always allowed to run with the dam, which accounts
for the fact that one seldom sees pure-bred Herefords that are not
well grown. The highest price paid for a Hereford was 4,000 guineas
for Lord Wilton in 1884.
_Devons._
The cattle of North Devon can be traced as the peculiar breed of the
county from which they take their name from the earliest records.
Bradley mentioned the red cattle of Somerset in 1726, and no doubt
there were many in Devonshire.[745] William Marshall states (1805),
and he is supported by subsequent writers, that 'they are of the
middle horn class', and in his time so nearly resembled the
Herefordshire breed in frame, colour, and horn, as not to be
distinguishable from them, except in the greater cleanness of the head
and fore-quarters, and their smaller size. Yet they could not have had
the white faces and throats of the Herefords, as they have always been
famous for their uniformity in colour--a fine dark red.[746] He also
compares them to the cattle of Sussex and the native cattle of
Norfolk.[747] The Devons then differed very much in different parts of
the county; those of North Devon taking the lead, being 'nearly what
cattle ought to be'. They were, considered as draught animals, the
best workers anywhere beyond all comparison, though rather small, for
which deficiency they made up in exertion and agility. As dairy cattle
they were not very good, since rearing for the east country graziers
had long been the main object of Devon cattle farmers, but as grazing
cattle they were excellent.
Vancouver, a few years after this, praised their activity in work and
their unrivalled aptitude to fatten, but says they were then
declining in their general standard of excellence, and in numbers,
owing to the great demand for them from other parts of England, where
the buyers (Mr. Coke, who had established a valuable herd of them,
and others) spared neither pains nor price to obtain those of the
highest excellence.
This danger was clearly perceived by Francis Quartly of Molland, who
set to work to remedy it by systematically buying the choicest cows he
could procure. As the reputation and perhaps continuance of the Devon
breed is due to him more than to any other man, his account of his own
efforts on behalf of it is specially valuable.[748] At the end of the
eighteenth century the principal North Devon yeomen were all breeders,
and every week you might see in the Molton Market, their natural
locality, animals that would now be called choice. There were few
cattle shows in those days, and therefore the relative value of
animals was not so easily tested. The war prices tempted many farmers
to sell their best bulls and cows out of the district, so that good
animals were becoming scarce, and the breed generally going back. Mr.
Quartly therefore for years bought all the best animals he could find
with rare skill and judgement, and continued to improve his stock till
he brought it to perfection. About the year 1834 cattle shows began at
Exeter, and for the first year or two Mr. Quartly did not compete;
then he allowed his nephews to enter in all the classes, and they
brought home all the prizes. This lead they kept, and at the Royal
Show at Exeter in 1850 their stock obtained nine out of the ten prizes
for Devons. The _Devon Herd-Book_ was first published in 1851 by
Captain T.T. Davy, and a writer in 1858 says that of twenty-nine
prize bulls in the first three volumes twenty-seven were descended
from the Quartly bull Forester, and of thirty-four prize cows
twenty-nine from the cow Curly, also of their stock.
Among other famous breeders of Devons contemporary with Quartly were
Messrs. Merson, Davy, Michael Thorne, Yapp, Buckingham, the Halses,
and George Turner.
In 1829 Moore says, 'The young heifers of North Devon, with their
taper legs, the exact symmetry of their form, and their clear coats of
dark red, are pictures of elegance.' Their superiority for grazing and
draught was proved by the high prices demanded for them, but they were
not equally esteemed as dairy animals,[749] though of late years this
reproach has been removed. The ploughing of two acres of fallow land
was the common work of four oxen, which, when fattened at five years
old, would reach eleven score a quarter.
Since the publication of the Herd-Book, Devons have spread all over
the world, to Mexico, Jamaica, Canada, Australia, France, and United
States, and the fact that in their original home they have been
largely kept by tenant farmers proves them a good rent-paying breed.
Yet it cannot be pretended that away from their native country they
are as much valued as the Shorthorn and Hereford.
The South Hams breed of South Devon is a distinct variety, though it
is believed to be descended from the 'Rubies'[750] and apparently has
at some time been crossed with the Guernsey; they are good milkers and
attain a great size, but the quality of the meat is decidedly inferior
to that of North Devon.
From the earliest times the real Devon colour has been red, varying
from a dark to a lighter or almost chestnut shade; half a century ago
the lighter ones were more numerous than at present, and they are
often of richer quality though less hardy than the dark ones.
The Sussex is larger and coarser than the Devon, of a deep brown
chestnut colour, very hardy, a beef-producing but not a milk-yielding
sort.
Longhorns,[751] a generation ago nearly extinct, once the favourite
cattle of the midlands and portions of the north, are descended from a
breed long established in the Craven district of Yorkshire. 'The true
Lancashire,' said Young in 1770, 'were Longhorns, and in Derbyshire
were a bastard sort of Lancashires.'[752] It was this breed that
Bakewell improved, and of late years great efforts, chiefly in
Warwickshire and Leicestershire, have been made to revive it.
The Red Polled, or Norfolk Polled, is the only hornless breed of
English cattle, and they are good milkers and fatteners.
The Lincoln Red is a small red variety of the Shorthorn.
Many of the Welsh breeds have spread into the adjacent parts of
England, and may be classified as North and South Welsh, or Angleseys
and Castle Martins; black in colour, and generally with long horns.
The Scottish cattle--the Aberdeen Angus, the Galloways, the Highland
breed, and the Ayrshires--are also seen in England, but not so often
as the Jerseys and Guernseys from the Channel Islands, while the
small Dexters and Kerrys from Ireland are favourites with some
English farmers.
SHEEP
The sheep of the British Isles may be divided into three main
classes:--
1. Longwools, containing Leicesters, Border Leicester's, Cotswolds,
Lincolns, Kentish, Devon Longwool, South Devon, Wensleydale, and
Roscommon.
2. Shortwools: the Oxford Downs, Southdowns, Shropshires, Hampshire
Downs, Suffolks, Ryelands, Somerset and Dorset Horned, and Clun
Forest.
3. Mountain breeds: Cheviots, Blackfaced Mountain, Herdwick, Lonk,
Dartmoor, Exmoor, Welsh Mountain, and Limestone.
These are all English except the Border Leicester, Cheviot, and
Blackfaced Mountain, which are Scotch; the Welsh Mountain is of
course Welsh, and the Roscommon Irish.
1. The Leicesters, the largest and in many respects the most
important of British longwool sheep, are the sheep which Bakewell
improved so greatly. They are capable of being brought to a great
weight, and their long fine wool averages 7 lb. to the fleece.
The Border Leicesters are an offshoot of the last named, bred on the
Scottish Border, and originating from the flock which George and
Matthew Culley in 1767 took from the Tees to the Tweed.
The Cotswolds have been on the Gloucestershire hills for ages, and
have long been famous for the length of their fleece, hardiness, and
breeding qualities.
The Lincoln is the result of the old native breed of the county
improved by Leicester blood. They have larger heads and denser and
heavier wool than the Leicesters, averaging 8 to 9 lb. to the fleece,
but have been known to yield 14 lb.
The Kentish or Romney Marsh have long existed in the district whence
they obtain their name, but are not much known away from that
locality.
The Devon Longwool is a result of the infusion of Leicester blood
among the old Bampton stock of Devonshire called Bampton Notts or
polled sheep.
The South Devons or South Hams are another local breed, and are a
result of the improvement of the South Hams Notts by the Leicester.
The Wensleydales are descendants of the old Teeswater breed, itself a
variety of the old Leicester and improved by the new Leicesters of
Culley.
2. Oxford Downs, a modern black-faced breed, now widely spread all
over the midland counties, are a mixture of Cotswolds with Hampshire
Downs and Southdowns, and originated at the beginning of Queen
Victoria's reign, but were not definitely so called till 1857. This
cross of two distinct varieties, the long and the short wool, has
approximated to the shortwool type.
The Southdown, formerly Sussex Down, an old breed bred for ages on
the chalky soils of the South Downs, is 'perhaps', says Youatt, 'the
most valuable breed in the kingdom.' It was to John Ellman of Glynde,
at the end of the eighteenth century, that they owe their present
perfection, and they have exercised as much influence among the
shortwools as the Leicesters among the longwools.
The Shropshire sheep is a descendant of the original Longmynd or old
Shropshire sheep, which began to be crossed by the Southdown at the
commencement of the nineteenth century.[753] They were recognized as a
distinct breed in 1853, and since then have become one of the most
valued breeds, combining the symmetry and quality of the Southdown
with the weight of the Cotswold and the fattening tendency of the
Leicester, with a hardier constitution.
The Hampshire Down is another instance of the widespread influence of
the Southdown, being the result of crossing that breed with the old
Wiltshire sheep, which had long curling horns, and the Berkshire
Knott. They are heavier than the Shropshire, and are perhaps more
distinguished for early maturity than any other breed.
The Suffolk is derived from the old horned Norfolk ewe mated with the
Southdown, and was first granted its name in 1859.
The Ryeland is a small, hornless, white-faced breed which has been in
Herefordshire for centuries, but of late years has dwindled in numbers
before the advent of the Shropshire.
The Somerset and Dorset Horned is another old breed, preserved in a
pure state, much improved in modern times, and very hardy.
The Clun Forest breed of West Shropshire and the adjacent parts of
Wales is a mixture of the Ryeland, Shropshire, and Welsh breeds.
3. The Cheviot is found on both sides of the hills of that name,
though Northumberland is said to be its original home, and it was
improved in the eighteenth century by crossing with the Lincoln.
The Blackfaced Mountain breed is found chiefly in Scotland, but
thrives on the bleak grazing lands of the north of England.
The Herdwicks' home is the hills of Cumberland and Westmoreland,
where they are hardy enough to fatten on the poor, thin pasture.
The Lonk is the largest mountain breed, belonging to the fells of
Yorkshire and Lancashire.
The Dartmoors and Exmoors almost certainly came from one stock,
though the former are now the larger, and are the few real survivors
of the old forest or mountain breeds of England. The Exmoor is
horned, the Dartmoor hornless.
The Welsh Mountain is a small, hardy, soft-woolled breed, their
mutton having the best flavour of any sheep, and their wool making
the famous Welsh flannel.
The Limestone is little known outside the fells of Westmoreland.
PIGS
Our pigs may be roughly divided into white, black, and red; the first
comprising the Large, Middle, and Small Whites, formerly called
Yorkshires; the second the Small Black (Suffolk or Essex), the Large
Black only recently recognized, but apparently very ancient, and the
Berkshire, which often has white marks on face, legs, or tail. The
red is the Tamworth, one of the oldest breeds, its skin being red
with dark spots.
FOOTNOTES:
[734] Youatt, _Complete Grazier_ (1900), p. 388; cf. pp. 104-5.
[735] Youatt, _Complete Grazier_ (1900), p. 6.
[736] See above.
[737] _Rural Economy of West of England_, i. 235 cf. above, p. 235.
[738] See above.
[739] ii. 126; about 1770.
[740] Youatt, _Complete Grazier_, p. 18, and see 'Druid', _Saddle and
Sirloin_.
[741] Cf. supra, p. 167.
[742] _Culley on Live Stock_ (1807), p. 42.
[743] See p. 233.
[744] Much of these accounts of Herefords and Devons is from the
author's articles in the _Victoria County History_.
[745] See above.
[746] Risdon, _Survey_ (1810), Introd. p. viii.
[747] _Rural Economy of West of England_, i. 235. Risdon says of
Devonshire: 'As to cattle, no part of the Kingdom is better supplied
with beasts of all sorts, whether for profit or pleasure,' those for
pleasure being apparently wild ones kept in parks.--Chapple's _Review
of Risdon's Survey_, p. 23.
[748] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (1st ser.), xi. 680. See also ibid. xix. 368,
and (2nd ser.) v. 107; xiv. 663; xx. 691.
[749] _History of Devon_, i. 456.
[750] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (3rd ser.), i. 527.
[751] See above.
[752] _Northern Tour_, ii. 126.
[753] _R.A.S.E. Journal_ (1858), p. 42.
APPENDIX I
AVERAGE PRICES FROM 1259 TO 1700[754]
CORN PER QUARTER.
WHEAT. BARLEY. OATS.
1259-1400 5s. 10-3/4d. 4s. 3-3/4d. 2s. 5-3/4d.
1401-1540 5s. 11-3/4d. 3s. 8-3/4d. 2s. 2-1/4d.
1541-82 13s. 10-1/2d. 8s. 5-3/4d. 5s. 5-1/2d.
1583-1700 39s. 0-1/2d. 21s. 4d. 13s. 10d.
RYE. BEANS.
1259-1400 4s. 4-7/8d. 4s. 3-1/2d.
1401-1540 4s. 7-3/4d. 3s. 9-1/4d.
1541-82 -- 9s. 1-1/2d.
1583-1700 -- 22s. 3-1/4d.
LIVE STOCK.
OXEN. COWS. CART HORSES.[755]
1259-1400 13s. 1-1/4d. 9s. 5d. 16s. 4d.
1401-1540 moderate increase 14s. unaltered
1541-82 55s. 32s. great increase
1583-1700 100s. 60s. 1580-1640 £5 to £10
1640-1700 £8 to £15
PIGS
SHEEP. LAMBS. (GROWN). BOARS.
1259-1400 1s. 2d. to 1s. 5d. 8d. 3s. 4s. 7d.
1401-1540 moderate increase 9d. unaltered 6s.
1541-82 3s. to 4s. 6d. 2s. to 3s. 6s. 8d. to 8s. --
1583-1700 10s. 7d. -- great increase
POULTRY AND EGGS.
HENS. DUCKS. GEESE. EGGS.
1259-1400 1-6/8d. 2d. 3-5/8d. 4-1/2d. per 120
1401-1540 2-1/4d. 2-1/4d. 4-3/4d. 6-1/2d "
1541-82 4-3/4d. 4-3/4d. 10d. 7-1/2d. "
1583-1700 8d.-1s. 9-1/4d. 2s. 3s. 3d. "
WOOL. CHEESE. BUTTER.
Per lb.
1259-1400 3-5/7d. 4-1/2d. per 7 lb. 4-3/4d. per 7 lb.
1401-1540 3-5/7d. 1/2d. per lb. 1d. per lb.
1541-82 7-1/2d. 1d. " 3d. "
1583-1702 9d.-1s. 3-1/2d. " 4-1/2d. "
HAY. HOPS.
Per load. Per cwt.
1259-1400 3s. 8d. --
1401-1540 unaltered 14s. 0-1/2d.
1541-82 9s. 6d. 26s. 8d.
1583-1702 26s. 4d. 82s. 9d.
LABOUR.
Reaping Reaping Labourer per
wheat oats Mowing day without
per acre. per acre. per acre. food.
1261-1350 5-5/8d. 4-7/8d. 5-1/4d. 2d.
1351-1400 8-1/2d. 8-1/4d. 7d. 3d.
1401-1540 9-3/4d. 8-1/4d. 8-1/8d. 4d.
1541-82 --[756] -- -- 6-1/2d.
1583-1640 -- -- 1s. 7d. 8-1/2d.
1640-1700 -- -- 1s. 8d. 10d.
PRICE OF LAND PER ACRE.
To Rent. To Buy.
Arable. Grass.
1261-1350 4d.-6d. 1s.-2s. 12 years' purchase
1351-1400 6d. 2s. "
1401-1540 6d. 2s. 15-20 years
1541-82 slight increase unaltered
1583-1640 great increase 20 years
1641-1700 5s. 8s. "
1770 10s. 30 years
FOOTNOTES:
[754] Summarized from Thorold Rogers' prices in his _History of
Agriculture and Prices_, with some alterations.
[755] Affri, 13s. 5d. cart horses, 19s. 4d. A good saddle horse about
1300 was worth £5. By 1580 it was worth £10 to £15, by 1700 £20 to
£25.
[756] A decided increase, but prices fluctuate so much that it is hard
to strike an average.
APPENDIX II
TABLE SHOWING EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF
WHEAT AND FLOUR FROM AND INTO ENGLAND,
Exports. Imports.
Quarters. Quarters.
England.
1697 14,699 400
1703 166,615 50
1717 22,954 none
1728 3,817 74,574
1733 427,199 7
1750 947,602 279
Great Britain.
1757 11,545 141,562
1758 9,234 20,353
1761 441,956 none
1767 5,071 497,905
1770 75,449 34
1775 91,037 560,988
1776 210,664 20,578
1780 224,059 3,915
1786 205,466 51,463
1787 120,536 59,339
1789 140,014 112,656
1791 70,626 469,056
1796 24,679 879,200
1801 28,406 1,424,765
1808 98,005 84,889
1810 75,785 1,567,126
1815 227,947 384,475
1825 38,796 787,606
1837 308,420 1,109,492
1839 42,512 3,110,729
1842 68,047 3,111,290
The above figures are taken from McCulloch's _Commercial
Dictionary_, 1847, p. 438, and agree roughly with those given by
McPherson, _Annals of Commerce_, iii. 674, and iv. 216 and 532.
After 1842, exports played a very small part, and imports continued
to increase; in 1847, 4,612,110 _quarters_ of wheat and flour
came in; and the following figures show their growth in recent
times:--
AVERAGE OF ANNUAL IMPORTS
OF WHEAT AND FLOUR IN CWTS.
1861-5 34,651,549
1866-70 37,273,678
1871-5 50,495,127
1876-80 63,309,874
1881-5 77,285,881
1886-90 77,794,380
1891-5 96,582,863
1896-1900 95,956,376
1901-5 111,638,817
With regard to the exports and imports of all kinds of corn, large
quantities were exported in the first half of the eighteenth century.
In 1733, 800,000 quarters were sent to France, Portugal, Spain, and
Italy,[757] and exports reached their maximum in 1750 with 1,667,778
quarters, but by 1760 had decreased to 600,000, and after that fell
considerably; in 1771, for instance, the first year of the corn
register, they only amounted to 81,665 quarters, whereas imports were
203,122. The figures of the imports were swollen by the large
quantities of oats which came into England at this time. The following
years are typical of the fluctuations in the trade:--
Exports. Imports.
1774 47,961 803,844
1776 376,249 444,121
1780 400,408 219,093
1782 278,955 133,663
1783 104,274 852,389
1784-8 large excess of imports, mainly oats
1789 652,764 478,426
the last year when exports of all kinds of corn exceeded imports.[758]
To sum up, according to these figures, England's exports of wheat
regularly exceeded her imports from 1697 until 1757, with the
exception of the years 1728-9; then they fluctuated till 1789, the
last year in which exports of wheat exceeded imports, and as the same
year is the last time when our exports of all kinds of corn exceeded
our imports, England at that date ceased to be an exporting country.[759]
FOOTNOTES:
[757] McPherson, _Annals of Commerce_, iii. 198.
[758] Ibid. iii. 674; iv. 216, 532.
[759] The excess of exports of wheat in 1808 was accidentally due to
the requirements of the army in Spain.
APPENDIX III
AVERAGE PRICES PER IMPERIAL QUARTER OF BRITISH CORN IN ENGLAND
AND WALES, IN EACH YEAR FROM 1771 TO 1907 INCLUSIVE, ACCORDING TO
THE RETURNS OF THE BOARD OF AGRICULTURE
YEARS. WHEAT. BARLEY. OATS.
s. d. s. d. s. d.
1771 48 7 26 5 17 2
1772 52 3 26 1 16 8
1773 52 7 29 2 17 8
1774 54 3 29 4 18 4
1775 49 10 26 9 17 0
1776 39 4 20 9 15 5
1777 46 11 21 1 16 1
1778 43 3 23 4 15 7
1779 34 8 20 1 14 5
1780 36 9 17 6 13 2
1781 46 0 17 8 14 1
1782 49 3 23 2 15 7
1783 54 3 31 3 20 5
1784 50 4 28 8 18 10
1785 43 1 24 9 17 8
1786 40 0 25 1 18 6
1787 42 5 23 4 17 2
1788 46 4 22 8 16 1
1789 52 9 23 6 16 6
1790 54 9 26 3 19 5
1791 48 7 26 10 18 1
1792 43 0 27 7 16 9
1793 49 3 31 1 20 6
1794 52 3 31 9 21 3
1795 75 2 37 5 24 5
1796 78 7 35 4 21 10
1797 53 9 27 2 16 3
1798 51 10 29 0 19 5
1799 69 0 36 2 27 6
1800 113 10 59 10 39 4
1801 119 6 68 6 37 0
1802 69 10 33 4 20 4
1803 58 10 25 4 21 6
1804 62 3 31 0 24 3
1805 89 9 44 6 28 4
1806 79 1 38 8 27 7
1807 75 4 39 4 28 4
1808 81 4 43 5 33 4
1809 97 4 47 0 31 5
1810 106 5 48 1 28 7
1811 95 3 42 3 27 7
1812 126 6 66 9 44 6
1813 109 9 58 6 38 6
1814 74 4 37 4 25 8
1815 65 7 30 3 23 7
1816 78 6 33 11 27 2
1817 96 11 49 4 32 5
1818 86 3 53 10 32 5
1819 74 6 45 9 28 2
1820 67 10 33 10 24 2
1821 56 1 26 0 19 6
1822 44 7 21 10 18 1
1823 53 4 31 6 22 11
1824 63 11 36 4 24 10
1825 68 6 40 0 25 8
1826 58 8 34 4 26 8
1827 58 6 37 7 28 2
1828 60 5 32 10 22 6
1829 66 3 32 6 22 9
1830 64 3 32 7 24 5
1831 66 4 38 0 25 4
1832 58 8 33 1 20 5
1833 52 11 27 6 18 5
1834 46 2 29 0 20 11
1835 39 4 29 11 22 0
1836 48 6 32 10 23 1
1837 55 10 30 4 23 1
1838 64 7 31 5 22 5
1839 70 8 39 6 25 11
1840 66 4 36 5 25 8
1841 64 4 32 10 22 5
1842 57 3 27 6 19 3
1843 50 1 29 6 18 4
1844 51 3 33 8 20 7
1845 50 10 31 8 22 6
1846 54 8 32 8 23 8
1847 69 9 44 2 28 8
1848 50 6 31 6 20 6
1849 44 3 27 9 17 6
1850 40 3 23 5 16 5
1851 38 6 24 9 18 7
1852 40 9 28 6 19 1
1853 53 3 33 2 21 0
1854 72 5 36 0 27 11
1855 74 8 34 9 27 5
1856 69 2 41 1 25 2
1857 56 4 42 1 25 0
1858 44 2 34 8 24 6
1859 43 9 33 6 23 2
1860 53 3 36 7 24 5
1861 55 4 36 1 23 9
1862 55 5 35 1 22 7
1863 44 9 33 11 21 2
1864 40 2 29 11 20 1
1865 41 10 29 9 21 10
1866 49 11 37 5 24 7
1867 64 5 40 0 26 0
1868 63 9 43 0 28 1
1869 48 2 39 5 26 0
1870 46 11 34 7 22 10
1871 56 8 36 2 25 2
1872 57 0 37 4 23 2
1873 58 8 40 5 25 5
1874 55 9 44 11 28 10
1875 45 2 38 5 28 8
1876 46 2 35 2 26 3
1877 56 9 39 8 25 11
1878 46 5 40 2 24 4
1879 43 10 34 0 21 9
1880 44 4 33 1 23 1
1881 45 4 31 11 21 9
1882 45 1 31 2 21 10
1883 41 7 31 10 21 5
1884 35 8 30 8 20 3
1885 32 10 30 1 20 7
1886 31 0 26 7 19 0
1887 32 6 25 4 16 3
1888 31 10 27 10 16 9
1889 29 9 25 10 17 9
1890 31 11 28 8 18 7
1891 37 0 28 2 20 0
1892 30 3 26 2 19 10
1893 26 4 25 7 18 9
1894 22 10 24 6 17 1
1895 23 1 21 11 14 6
1896 26 2 22 11 14 9
1897 30 2 23 6 16 11
1898 34 0 27 2 18 5
1899 25 8 25 7 17 0
1900 26 11 24 11 17 7
1901 26 9 25 2 18 5
1902 28 1 25 8 20 2
1903 26 9 22 8 17 2
1904 28 4 22 4 16 4
1905 29 8 24 4 17 4
1906 28 3 24 2 18 4
1907 30 7 25 1 18 10
APPENDIX IV
MISCELLANEOUS INFORMATION
Gregory King, at the end of the seventeenth century, estimated the
acreage of England and Wales at 39,000,000--not at all a bad
estimate, the area, excluding water, according to the Board of
Agriculture Returns of 1907, being 37,130,344. The different
estimates by Grew, Templeman, Petty, Young, Halley, Middleton, and
others varied between 31,648,000 and 46,916,000 acres. The last, that
of Arthur Young, was actually adopted by Pitt for his estimate of the
income-tax.[760]
* * * * *
Caird in 1850[761] estimated the cultivated lands of England at
27,000,000 acres (in 1907 they were 24,585,455 acres), cultivated
thus:--
Permanent grass 13,333,000
Arable 13,667,000
the latter being divided as follows:--
Acres. Bushels Produce,
per acre. quarters.
Wheat 3,416,750 27 11,531,531
Barley 1,416,750 38 6,729,562
Oats and rye 2,000,000 44 11,000,000
Clover and seeds 2,277,750
Beans and peas 1,139,000 30 4,271,250
Turnips, marigolds, & potatoes 2,116,750
Rape and fallow 1,300,000
Davenant, at the end of the seventeenth century, made the following
estimate showing the importance of wool in English trade[762]:--
Annual income of England £43,000,000
Yearly rent of land 10,000,000
Value of wool shorn yearly 2,000,000
" woollen manufactures 10,000,000
Thus the rents of land formed nearly one-fourth the total income of
the country, and wool paid one-fifth of the rents.[763]
In the eighteenth century a great quantity of wool was smuggled out
of England in defiance of the law; in the space of four months in
1754, 4,000 tods was 'run' into Boulogne.[764]
FOREIGN AND COLONIAL WOOL
IMPORTED INTO ENGLAND.[765]
lb.
1766 1,926,000
1771 1,829,000
1780 323,000
1790 2,582,000
1800 8,609,000
1810 10,914,000
1820 9,775,000
1830 32,305,000
1840 49,436,000
1850 74,326,000
1855 99,300,000
1857 127,390,000
PRICES OF LABOUR IN SURREY IN 1780.[766]
s. d.
Day labourer, per day, in winter 1 4
" " in summer 1 6
Reaping wheat, per acre 7 0
" " and according to the crop up to 12 0
Mowing barley, per acre 2 6
" oats, " 1s. 6d. to 2 0
" grass " 2 6
Hand-hoeing turnips, per acre, first time 6 0
" " second time 4 0
Thatching hayricks, per square of 100 ft. 1 0
Washing and shearing sheep, per score 3 0
Ploughing light land, per acre 5 0
" stiff " " 7s. to 10 0
Common hurdles, each 5
OCCUPIERS OF LAND.
In 1816 there were said to be 589,374 occupiers of land in Great
Britain[767]--
With incomes under £50 114,778
Between £50 and £150 432,534
Over £150 42,062
-------
589,374
=======
In 1907 there were 510,954 occupiers of one acre and more.
MULHALL'S CALCULATION OF AVERAGE ANNUAL WAGES IN ENGLAND.
Bailiff. Shepherd. Labourer. Woman. Boy.
1800 £20 £16 £12 £8 £6
1850 40 25 20 10 8
1880 52 36 30 15 10
The average annual cost of living of an agricultural family of five
was in 1823 £31, in 1883, £37.
COMPARATIVE STATEMENT BY A. YOUNG OF PRICES AND WAGES IN ENGLAND
FROM 1200 TO 1810 ON THE PRINCIPLE OF REPRESENTING FACTS
IN 1810 BY THE NUMBER 20, AND THE FACTS OF THE PRECEDING PERIODS
BY THE PROPORTION BORNE BY THEM TO THAT NUMBER.
Labourer's
Periods. Wheat. Meat. Wool. Wages. Horses.
1200-99 5-1/2 ... 3-1/2 ...
1300-99 6-1/4 ... 4-3/4 ...
1400-99 3 ... 5-1/2 ...
1500-99 6 ... 5-1/2 ...
1600-99 9-1/4 ... 8 ...
1700-66 7-3/4 7-1/2 12 10 15-3/4
1767-89 11 11-1/2 15-1/3 12-1/2 17-1/4
1790-1803 13 16-1/2 16-1/6 16-3/4 19-1/2
1804-10 20 20 20 20 20
Thus wheat in 1804-10 had risen 233 per cent. since the sixteenth
century.
THE LABOURER'S WAGES.
The following table, published by Mr. Barton in 1817,[768] shows
the depreciation of the labourer's wages in purchasing power between
1742 and 1808:--
Weekly Price of Wages in
Period. pay. wheat. pints of
s. d. s. d. bread.
1742-52 6 0 30 0 102
1761-70 7 6 42 6 90
1780-90 8 0 51 2 80
1795-9 9 0 70 8 65
1800-8 11 0 86 8 60
In answer to inquiries sent by the Poor Law Commissioners in 1834 to
900 parishes in England the average weekly wages of labourers were--
in summer,
s. d.
in 254 parishes, with beer or cider 10 4-3/4
522 " without beer or cider 10 5-1/2
in winter,
in 200 " with beer or cider 9 2-1/4
544 " without beer or cider 9 11-3/4
The annual average inclusive earnings of the labourer
£ s. d.
himself were stated at 27 17 10
and of his wife and children 13 19 10
------------
41 17 8
============
It will thus be seen that the wife and children provided a third of
the income. The majority of the parishes said the labourer could
maintain his family on these wages.
Here is the weekly budget of a labourer with an average family in
1800:--[769]
Cr. s. d.
Wages 15 0
Garden 1 6
Extras 1 0
-----
17 6
=====
Dr. s. d.
Rent 1 7-1/2
Bread 6 0
Bacon 2 6
Tea and sugar 1 3
Cheese 1 6
Butter 1 6
Fuel 1 3
Candles and soap 0 6
Clothes 1 6
Schooling 0 3
Sundries 0 6
---------
18 4-1/2
=========
There is no fresh meat, and it is hard to say where any economy could
be practised.
CONTRACT PRICES OF
BUTCHER'S MEAT PER CWT.
AT GREENWICH HOSPITAL,
1730-1842.[770]
£ s. d.
1730 1 5 8
1740 1 8 0
1750 1 6 6
1760 1 11 6
1770 1 8 6
1780 1 12 6
1790 1 16 10
1800 4 4
1810 3 12 0
1815 3 8 0
1820 3 10 4
1825 2 19 6
1830 2 3 6
1835 2 0 7
1840 2 14 0
1842 2 12 8
FOOTNOTES:
[760] C. Wren Hoskyns, _Pamphlet on Agricultural Statistics_, p. 19.
[761] _English Agriculture in 1850-1_, p. 521. Cf. above, p. 331.
[762] Smith, _Memoirs of Wool_, i. 157.
[763] In 1908 the rental of agricultural land was 3-1/2 per cent. of
the total income of the country. See _The Times_ May 13, 1909.
[764] Ibid. ii. 264.
[765] Cunningham, _Industry and Commerce_, ii. 693. Cf. above, p. 328.
[766] Trusler, _Practical Husbandry_, p. 153.
[767] Farmer's Magazine (1817), p. 6. Statistics at this date,
however, must be taken with caution. They were usually estimates. Cf.
above, p. 334, for holdings in England.
[768] _Parliamentary Reports, Commissioners_ (1881), xvi, 305.
[769] _Parliamentary Reports, Commissioners_ (1881), xvi. 310.
[770] McCulloch, _Commercial Dictionary_ (1852), p. 271.
INDEX
Abbot's Ripton, 72.
Aberdeen Angus cattle, 288, 343.
Accounts, keeping, 29, 49.
Accumulation of estates, 123.
Acre, 2; tenantry, 253.
Advantages of large farms, 202.
Affer, the, 35.
Agricultural Holdings Acts, 283, 296, 299-303.
Agricultural revolution, the, of eighteenth century, 162.
Agriculture,
state of, 28, 38, 111, 113, 115, 123, 132, 160, 162, 192, 204,
211, 221, 229, 244, 245, 250, 265, 267, 274, 287, 305;
seventeenth-century writers on, 127;
state of, in eighteenth century, 162, 192, 221, 229;
nineteenth, 244, 245, 262-70, 271, 287.
Aitchison, 237.
Akermanni, 13.
Alderney cattle, 233.
Ale, 10.
Allotments, 196, 230, 253, 255n., 315-7.
Allowance system, 237.
Allowances, parish, 238, 241, 257, 284.
Almaine, corn from, 20.
Almonds, 93, 136.
Amalgamation of farms, 29, 46, 47, 95, 119, 120, 162, 202, 258, 317.
America,
gold discoveries in, 287;
imports from, 262, 293, 323-4.
Ancaster, Earl of, estate of, 321.
Andover, 39.
Anti-Corn Law League, 280.
Apples, 15, 65, 93, 129, 130, 131, 135-6, 143, 171, 186-9, 329, 332.
(_See_ Prices.)
Apprentices, 108.
Apricots, 93, 136.
Arable district of England (1893), 306n.
Arable fields, 1, 2, 4, 16, 73.
Arable land, 56, 99, 100, 195;
amount of, in 1688, 155;
decrease of, 59;
extent of, in Domesday, 19;
in 1770, 199;
in 1850, 353;
in 1877 and 1907, 332;
preponderance of, 25, 30;
produce of, in 1688, 155;
suffers more than grass, 248, 266, 281, 285, 286, 306;
value of, 19, 40, 58, 115-7, 139.
Arch, Joseph, 290-2.
Ardley, Inquisition of, 9.
Argentina, imports from, 324.
Arley, Upper, wine made at, 145.
Artificial grasses, _see_ Clover, improve commons, 166.
Ash timber, value of, 137.
Assize of beer, 13, 14n.
Association, British, 336.
Average crops of corn (1770), 197.
(_See under_ Wheat, Oats, Barley, &c.)
Average size of farms in 1768, 202.
Averagium, 10.
Australia, gold discoveries in, 287;
imports from, 324;
sheep introduced into, 328;
wool from, 328.
Axholme, 123, 260, 311, 318.
Ayrshires, 339, 343.
Bacon, Lord, 322,
Bacon, 'the necessary meate' of the labourer, 102, 140;
price of, _see_ Prices.
Badger, a corn dealer, 134.
Bailiff, 12, 29, 49, 51, 61, 71, 103, 109, 110, 137, 139, 355.
Bakewell, 146, 163-7, 214-7, 226, 233, 343, 344.
Balance sheet, estate, 307;
farm, in 1805, 247;
in 1888, 309.
Balks, 3.
Ball, John, 60.
Banbury cheese, 173.
Bank Restriction Act, 239, 240, 263.
Barking Nunnery, vineyard at, 144.
Barley, 20, 33, 36, 65, 91, 124, 135, 142, 155, 182, 227, 331-2, 353;
cost of, per acre, 198;
produce, per acre, 165n., 197-8;
profit on, 179, 180. (_See_ Prices.)
Barns, size of, 51.
Barren years at end of seventeenth century, 115, 157.
Basic slag, 304.
Bassingthorpe, 103.
Bates, Thomas, 274, 338.
Bath, wine made at, 145.
Beale, John, 128, 130.
Beans, 17, 33, 49, 124, 155, 187, 201, 262, 331-2, 353;
cost of growing, 199;
profit on, 180. (_See_ Prices.)
Bedford, Duke of, 225, 318, 321.
Bedfordshire, 3, 18, 79, 120, 123, 238, 306.
Beef, price of, _see_ Prices.
Beer, 36, 329.
Belgium,
live stock in, 334;
wheat crops in, 332n.
Belvoir estate, 115, 286.
Berkeley estates, 3, 27n., 35n., 48, 56, 64, 74, 75.
Berkshire, 104, 175, 237, 284, 286, 306n.
Berkshire Knotts, 345;
pigs, 346.
Berlin decrees, 242.
Best, Henry, accounts of, 138-40.
Bideford, 262.
Biggleswade, 318.
Birds eating fruit, 129.
Black Death, 27, 41-3, 59, 75.
Black Year, the, 294.
Blight, Hop, 150.
Blyth, 113, 127, 137, 152.
Board of Agriculture, 192, 193, 214, 229-33, 255;
(Government), 290.
Bones for manure, 154-5, 273, 275-6, 299.
Booth, Thomas, 337-8.
Bordarii, 8, 11.
Boston, 308, 318, 327.
Boys' wages, 206.
Bradley, 152, 167, 168-9, 170, 171, 181, 336.
Brampton, 235.
Bread, different kinds of, 54, 102, 206-7, 230;
rye, 101, 134, 206;
wheaten, a luxury, 101;
common, 207, 240;
made of turnips, 157;
price of (_see_ Prices).
Breeding of stock, 37, 146, 167, 215-7, 256, 273.
Brentford, 157.
Bridport, 262.
Bright, John, 280.
Buckinghamshire, 78, 146, 172, 291, 306n.
Buckwheat, 332.
Budget, labourer's weekly, 206, 208, 356.
Buildings, farm, and repairs, 51, 272, 279, 282, 299, 302, 307, 310.
Bull, description of a (1726), 167.
Burford, riot at, 185.
Buri, 8, 11.
Bury St. Edmunds, 110, 147.
Butter, 33, 63n., 66, 114, 138, 140, 161, 174, 205, 206n., 241, 247
(_see_ Prices), 304, 305, 313, 325;
exports of, 326-7.
By-industries of peasant, 110, 239, 250, 257, 260, 269, 317.
Cabbages, 112, 143, 187, 191, 194, 200, 201, 331.
Cadaveratores, 13.
Caird, Sir James, 279, 281, 285, 287, 310, 314, 319n.
Cake, 296, 300, 305, 314.
Calstock, 318.
Calves, killing of, forbidden, 86;
rearing, 125.
Cambridgeshire, 79, 151, 167, 222, 262, 306n., 318.
Camden, 173, 335.
Canada, imports from, 323-4.
Canterbury, hops from, 171.
Capital of farmers, 197, 203-4.
Carrington, Lord, 231.
Carrots, 112, 128, 143, 167, 191, 194, 331. 332.
Carter, wages of, 110.
Cart-horses, price of, 35, 114.
Carts, 153.
Cattle, Chillingham, 336;
diseases, 85;
export of, 326, 330;
improvement in, 336, 337, 338 (_see_ Cattle, size of);
number of, in 1867 and 1878, 288;
in 1907, 333-4;
original breed of, 336;
price of, _see_ Prices;
size of, 37, 104, 146, 169, 288, 336, 342;
separation of, for summer pasture, 124;
sorts of (1726), 167 (_see under_ Various breeds);
about 1800, 235;
in 1839, 274;
in 1892, 274, 336;
time to buy, 125. (_See_ Bakewell, Collings, Exports, _and_ Imports.)
Cattle plagues, of eighteenth century, 172, 185-6, 290;
of nineteenth century, 289-90, 294.
Cauliflowers, 143.
Causes of high prices at end of eighteenth century, 240.
Celery, 318.
Chamberlayne, 259.
Cheddar cheese, 173.
Cheese, 33, 63n., 66, 161, 173, 174, 200, 206n., 276, 305, 313, 325.
(_See_ Prices, Exports, _and_ Imports.)
Chelmsford, 110, 171, 307.
Chemistry, agricultural, 232, 243, 275.
Cherries, 15, 129, 130, 131, 136, 143, 171, 329, 332.
Cheshire, 3, 110, 167, 173, 224, 276, 295, 306.
Chestnuts, 136.
Cheviots, 344, 346,
Child, Josiah, 117.
Christ Church, Canterbury, 42.
Cider, 37, 130, 131, 135-6, 149, 187-9, 207, 269.
Cistercians, good farmers, 29, 327.
Civil War, checks improvement, 113;
family settlements after, 123.
Claret made in Oxfordshire, 145.
Clarke, 236.
Close parishes, 158, 284.
Cloth made in England, 69, 70.
Clothes, part of wages, 28, 109;
of labourer, 54, 71, 109, 185, 206-8, 211, 311;
of farmer, 105, 213.
Clover, cost of growing, 198;
extent of, 331, 333, 353;
introduced, 111, 112;
spread of, 115, 141-2, 164, 166, 178, 179, 191, 194;
seed, price of, 223;
sown with corn, 166.
Clun Forest sheep, 344, 346.
Clydesdale horse, 335.
Cobbett, 107, 226, 265, 268.
Cobden, Richard, 279n., 280, 285n.
Coinage, depreciation of, 44, 59, 89.
Coke of Holkham, 163, 182, 224-8, 275, 341.
'Coke's Clippings', 227.
Coleseed, 115.
Coliberti, 8.
Collings, the, 146, 163, 167, 233-5, 337.
Combe, 53.
'Comet,' 234, 235.
Commissions, Royal, on Agriculture, &c., 260, 266, 289, 294-6, 300, 303,
304, 305, 311-14, 316, 318, 320, 329.
Committees, Parliamentary, 256, 258, 263n., 266, 267.
Common, John, 303.
Common fields, 22, 26, 78, 112, 113, 118-9, 120, 194, 253, 258.
Common land, 3, 145, 148;
evils of, 148, 194, 256, 257;
improvement of, 166.
Common pasture, _see_ Pasture _and_ Meadows.
Commons, advantages of, 165;
extent of, in 1795, 231;
rights of, lost, 253.
Communities and corporations contrasted, 2.
Commutation of labour services for money, 27, 45.
Compensation for improvements, 296, 299-302.
Competition, foreign, 296, 297, 312, 315, 319, 323-30.
Consolidation of farms, _see_ Amalgamation.
Contractors for labour, 209.
Co-operation in agriculture, 1.
Copyholders, 59, 121-2.
Corn laws, 63, 64, 69, 70, 159, 160, 242, 248, 250, 265-6, 277-80.
Cornwall, 136, 186, 295, 309, 318.
Cost of living (1773-1800), 241.
Cotarii, 8, 11, 25.
Cotswold sheep, 233, 275, 343, 344;
wool, famous, 172.
Cottages, 52, 117, 121n., 139, 158, 159, 206, 209, 250, 254, 255,
267-8, 285, 297, 304, 311n., 315-6.
Court Rolls, of Manydown, 13.
Cowper, John, 165.
Cows, decrease in number of, 96;
increase, 325;
let out by the year, 34, 57, 65;
yield of, 33, 64. (_See_ Prices of Cattle.)
Craik improves drill, 202.
Craven, migration from, 44.
Crimean War, effect of, 277n., 287.
Crondall, 28.
Crows' and magpies' nests to be destroyed, 100.
Culley, George, 217, 234, 337, 344.
Cultivated land, amount of, in 1685, 120;
in 1867, 288.
Cultivation, Walter of Henley on, 32;
of England, in 1688, 155;
the old and new ways of, 177, 180, 194, 200-2.
Cultivation, clauses, 57, 178, 218, 296, 302, 322.
Cumberland, 238, 295, 309, 311, 346.
Currants, 331.
Custom of the country, 299, 300n., 302 (_see_ Tenant right).
Cuxham, manor of, 24.
Cylindrical drain pipes, 272.
Dairy, the, and dairying, 33, 59, 168, 170, 173, 199-200, 297, 307,
306, 313, 319, 325, 340-1.
(_See_ Butter, Cheese, _and_ Milk.)
Damsons, 15, 136.
Danegeld, 6.
Dartmoor sheep, 344, 346.
Davenant, 115, 117, 120, 260, 354.
Daventry, common fields at, 115, 117, 120, 260, 354.
Davy, Sir H., 232, 276;
T.T., 342.
Dealers, legislation against, 86, 93, 134;
complaints against, 237.
Defoe, Daniel, 166, 168, 169, 171, 174, 220, 259.
Degge, Simon, 122.
Demesne, 7, 15, 30, 45, 56, 58, 65, 74, 97, 99.
Denmark, imports from, 241, 262, 323-4;
livestock in, 334;
wheat crops in, 332n.
Depression, agricultural, 163, 183, 184, 223, 228, 242, 248,
262-70, 281, 292, 293-6, 305-14.
Derby, Lord, estate of, 320n.
Derbyshire, 44, 167, 309, 343.
Devon cattle, 168, 217, 225, 233, 274, 288, 336, 339, 340-3.
(_See_ Southams.)
Devon sheep, 343, 344.
Devonshire, 37, 73, 107, 113, 128, 132, 136, 186, 187, 244, 245, 269,
272, 295, 306, 309, 338.
Devonshiring, 141.
D'Ewes, Sir S., quoted, 117, 133.
Dexters, 343.
Dibbling wheat, 135.
Digging for wheat, 135.
Diseases of Animals Act (1890), 290.
Dishley, 214-6.
Distress, law of, 296, 301;
periods of, 42, 68 (_see_ Depression, agricultural), 237, 242.
Divining rod, 232.
Domesday, 5, 14, 16, 19, 60, 79, 144.
Doncaster, roads near, 221.
Dorking, manor of, 65.
Dorset, 3, 263, 285, 291, 312, 318;
sheep, 344, 346.
Dovecotes, _see_ Pigeons.
Drainage, 16, 32, 113, 128, 129, 137, 154, 163, 201, 202, 213-4, 219, 230,
271, 273, 279, 282, 288, 299, 300, 305, 307, 310.
Drills, 113, 152, 175-7, 180, 183, 200-2, 226, 227, 271, 274.
Drinking habits, 207-8, 269.
Drying hops, 151.
Duchesses, the, 234, 274, 338.
Duckham, Mr., 339.
Ducks, 170 (_see_ Poultry).
Dugdale, 77.
Du-Hamel, 202.
Durham, 119, 337.
Durham ox, 234, 235.
Dutch breed of cattle, _see_ Shorthorns.
Eakring, common meadows at, 22.
Eardisley, 5.
East Indies, wool from, 328.
Eden, account of potatoes, 106, 207, 238, 256.
Education Acts, 292, 297.
Egypt, imports from, 323.
Eighteenth century, general characteristics of, 162.
Electricity applied to vegetables, 236.
Elevator, hay and straw, 304.
Elkington of Princethorpe, 213-4, 230, 271.
Ellis, Chiltern and Vale Farming, 180.
Ellman, John, 217, 345.
Enclosers prosecuted in Star Chamber, 120.
Enclosure, 74-82, 85, 92, 96, 97, 119, 173, 182, 194, 228, 252-261;
agreement as to, 98;
acts of, 119, 163, 196, 231, 233, 252, 253, 258;
amount of, exaggerated, 121;
different kinds of, 73, 119, 165, 196;
eighteenth century, 163, 165, 173, 182, 183, 194, 196, 253;
evils of, 194, 195, 252-3, 254-61, 316;
expense of, 196, 252;
non-parliamentary,165, 253;
a deed of, 75;
a sign of progress, 76, 114, 139, 145-8, 253;
legislation against, 79, 80, 120;
checked, 120.
England, appearance of, in fifteenth century, 78;
in the seventeenth, 120-1.
English invaders, 1.
Entails, barred, 122.
Essex, 62, 78, 106, 128, 173, 190, 225, 286, 295, 306, 309, 319.
Estates, great, accumulation of, 123;
advantages of, 322;
often a loss, 321.
Evelyn, John, 127, 149.
Evesham, Vale of, 318.
Ewes, milking of, 33, 64, 200.
Exhibition, Great, 287, 304.
Exmoor sheep, 344, 346.
Exporting country, England ceases to be an, 161, 163.
Exports of butter and cheese, 326-7.
Exports of corn, 63n., 64, 70, 159-161, 183, 185, 242, 267, 348-9;
reaches its maximum, 186;
of livestock, 325-6;
of wool, 39, 69, 172, 327.
Extensive cultivation, 2.
Extent of the Manor, 10.
Eyton, Mr., 339.
Faggots, price of, 114.
Fairs for hops, 171;
horses, 105;
sheep, 172n.;
wool, 172n.
Fallows, utilized, 112, 177, 181, 191, 195;
in 1877, 1907, 331;
in 1850, 353.
Families employed on common and on enclosed land, 195.
Farm or feorm, 5.
Farmer, day's work of, in seventeenth century, 134;
discontent of, 127-8, 184;
financial position of, 101, 103, 156, 162, 184, 195, 204, 212-3, 243,
247, 257-8, 264-5, 293, 307, 308, 310, 320;
growing more skilful, 101, 132.
_Farmer's Letters_, Young's, 192.
Farmhouses, 51, 101, 116, 119, 213, 226.
Farming, bad, 273, 281;
improvement in, 28, 111, 113, 115, 132, 160, 162, 192, 204, 211, 221,
229, 244, 265, 267, 271, 274, 275, 281, 288.
Farming calendar, 17, 124.
Farms, in sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, 116-7;
size of (1768), 202.
Farnham, hops, 171.
Fashion, farming becomes the, 192, 193.
Fattening oxen, 31, 58, 125, 136-7, 166, 214, 216, 225n., 235, 288;
sheep, 112, 166, 225n.;
chickens, 170.
'Favourite', 234.
Feeding pigs, 16, 125.
Fences, legislation as to, 4.
Fens, the, 78, 123, 170, 318.
Feversham, fruit growing near, 128, 171.
Fifteenth century, character of, 68.
Figs, 15, 93, 136.
Filberts, 93, 136.
Fitzherbert, 31, 61, 76, 77, 83-5, 111, 132, 135.
Fixtures, 301.
Flanders, cattle, 338;
clover from, 111, 166;
hops from, 86, 150;
wool exported to, 39, 327;
sheep exported to, 326.
Flax, 17, 105, 135, 141, 151-2, 191, 251, 331, 332.
Fleece, weight of, 37, 41, 104, 200, 215.
Fleta, quoted, 12, 13.
Floor, for hop-picking, 91, 151.
Flour, exports and imports of, 348-9.
Fluctuations in price of corn, 35, 66, 89, 133, 142, 157, 186, 221,
223, 277.
Fold soke, 9.
Folding quality, of sheep, 253.
Food, labourer's, 9, 25, 34, 37, 53, 54, 61, 62, 102, 110, 134,
139-40, 164, 200-8, 211, 240n., 268, 290-1, 297, 308, 311;
farmer's, 101, 128, 213, 240n., 246, 308.
Foot-and-mouth disease, _see_ Cattle Plagues.
Foot-rot, 294.
Foreman, requirements of, 139.
Forncett, manor of, 25, 45, 46.
Fountains Abbey, 81.
Four-course rotation, 183.
Four-field system, 99.
Fourteenth century, characteristics of, 38.
Fowler, John, 304.
Fox, the, 140, 244.
France, exports to, 349;
imports from, 243, 323;
livestock in, 334;
small holders of, 202-3;
wheat crops in, 332.
Freeholders, _see also_ Yeoman, 119, 121-2.
Freemen, 7.
Free tenants, 24, 29, 45.
Free trade, 161, 277-81, 323;
effect of, 281, 284, 288, 293, 296.
French War, great, _see_ Wars.
Fruit, 15, 93, 128, 143;
imports of 305.
Fruit-growing in seventeenth century, 129-131, 132, 136;
in eighteenth century, 171, 186-9;
in nineteenth century, 319, 329, 330.
Furlongs, 3, 118.
Furniture of manor house, 52;
labourer's home, 52.
Gafol, 9, 10.
Galloway cattle, 169, 343.
Game, damage by, 302.
Game law, the first, 55.
Gang system, 292.
Geese, 34, 170. (_See_ Poultry.)
Gentry, at the Revolution, 156;
estates of under Walpole, 183;
status of 50, 97;
supplanted, 122, 128, 137, 140, 156, 184, 211, 312, 310.
(_See_ Landlords _and_ Squire).
Gerard, 106, 111.
'Gerefa, the', 15.
Germany, exports to, 63;
imports from, 20, 66, 69, 241, 243, 262, 323-4, 328;
livestock in, 334;
wheat crops in, 332n.
Gilbert, 275.
Gilbert's Act, 237.
Gilbey, Sir W.,335.
Glamorganshire, vineyards in, 145.
Glastonbury Abbey, 13.
Gleaning, 133.
Gloucestershire, 19, 78, 128, 136, 143, 144, 173, 207, 295, 344.
Gloves, gifts of, 62.
Gold premium, 305.
Googe, Barnaby, 144, 173.
Gooseberries, 331.
Grafting in seventeenth century, 130.
Grain crops, chief source of lord's income, 25.
Grapes, 136, 329 (_see_ Vineyards).
Grass, acreage under, in 1877 and 1907, 331-2;
in 1850, 353;
arable land laid down to, 56, 58, 75, 79, 91, 93-4, 117-9, 120, 196,
219, 231, 305;
converting, to tillage, 231, 263;
more profitable than arable, 199;
seeds, 165, 191, 194, 226-7.
Grass land, price of, _see_ Pasture and meadow, price of;
ploughed up, 186, 218, 245.
Grass section of England in 1893, 306n.
Grasshoppers, plague of, 185.
Graziers, profits of, 184,
Greycoats of Kent, 259.
Ground Game Act, 303.
Guano, 232, 276.
Guernsey cattle, 342, 343.
Gun, the, in seventeenth century, 140.
Haggard, Rider, Mr., 314-5.
Hallam, 210.
Hambleton, Sir A. Barker of, 142.
Hamlets, 5.
Hampshire, 28, 36, 79, 116, 132, 145, 165n., 240, 253, 266, 268, 306n.,
309, 314;
sheep, 275, 288, 344, 345.
Handborough, 53.
Harrison, 'Description of England,' 19, 28, 50, 56, 86, 91, 95, 101,
104, 149.
Harrow, the, and harrowing, 17, 65, 84, 125, 135, 141, 153-4, 166,
176, 176, 179, 194, 201, 203, 246.
Hartlib, Simon, 127, 128, 130, 131, 132, 142-3.
Harvest, importance of, 9, 108.
Harvest homes, 104, 269.
Harvest work, 25, 62, 125, 138, 209.
Hatfield Chase, 78.
Hawsted, 20, 30, 35, 54, 57, 58, 62, 63, 67, 112, 115, 116, 178,
179, 205, 207.
Hay, 112;
price of, _see_ Prices;
carrying off, 178, 219, 302;
imports of, 262.
Hay tedder, 304.
Haymaking, 4, 44, 124, 125, 138, 142.
Headlands, 3.
'Heaths', Shropshire, 220.
Hedges, 124, 148, 150, 163, 178, 282.
Hemp, 100, 105, 135, 151.
Henley, Walter of, 19n., 31, 36, 83.
Henry of Huntingdon, 327.
Hens, number of eggs from, 35.
Herdwick sheep, 344, 346.
Hereford cattle, 233, 235, 274, 288, 336, 338-40, 342.
Herefordshire, 5, 40, 128, 130, 132, 136, 143, 171, 186-7, 188, 240,
247, 249, 250, 267, 291, 306, 309, 316.
Hertfordshire, 150, 174, 179, 225, 238, 306n.
Hentzner's description of English fanning, 104.
Hide, 16.
Highland, West, cattle, 217, 343.
Hoeing, 153, 166, 188, 201-2, 354;
horse, 198, 201.
Holder, the small, 73, 76, 119, 121-2, 164, 191, 195, 202, 205, 220,
253-61, 268, 308, 310, 311, 316-9;
decrease of, causes of, 122, 259;
new class of, 260.
Holderness cattle, 337.
Holdings, various sizes of, 334.
Holland,
Shorthorns from, 337;
live stock in, 334;
wheat crops in, 332n.
Honey, 10, 144.
Hops, 28, 86-7, 89-91, 111, 125, 128, 143, 149, 150, 171, 297-9,
329-30, 331;
acreage of, in 1729, 171, 297-8, 329;
average crop, 333;
duty on, 297-8;
imports of, 329-30;
profit on, 90, 150, 171, 298-9, 330;
substitutes, 298, 329.
Horse fairs, 105.
Horse shoes, 36.
Horses,
deterioration of; 85, 146;
export of, 325-6;
kinds of, 274, 335;
number of, 333;
size of, 104, 105, 217;
tax on, 249;
working powers of, 31, 153, 204.
(_See_ Prices.)
Houghton, account of potatoes, 106, 127, 165.
Houses, wooden, 50 (_see_ Farmhouses);
of the squire and yeoman, 103, 212.
Housing cattle and horses, 126.
Howberry, 175-6.
'Hubback', 234.
Hundred Rolls, 28, 76, 327.
Hunting, 140, 210.
Huntingdonshire, 3, 25n., 72, 120, 123, 222, 306n., 309.
Hurdles, 354.
Husbandry, old and new, _see_ Cultivation.
Implements, cost of, rises, 242;
in seventeenth century, 135, 152-3, 154;
in eighteenth century, 188, 194, 203, 229, 236;
in nineteenth century, 271, 273-5, 276, 287n., 303-4, 316;
improvement in, 113;
list of, in eleventh century, 17-52;
prices of, 83, 138.
Importing country, England becomes an, 163.
Imports cause low prices, 295.
Imports
of clover seed, 166;
of corn, 20, 63n., 66, 69, 70, 159-61, 183, 184, 223, 224, 230, 240,
241-4, 247, 248, 249, 262, 266, 267, 277-80, 287, 293, 305, 323-4,
330, 348-9;
of dairy produce, 325;
of fruit, 188, 329;
of hops, 150;
of linen, 105;
of livestock, 161, 280-1, 305, 324-6, 337;
of meat, 161, 305, 325, 330;
of wool, 39, 161, 305, 328, 354.
Improvements, amount expended in, 320-1;
needed in eighteenth century, 191;
in farming in eighteenth century, 192 (_see_ Agriculture, state of), 193,
204 (_see_ Farming).
Inbreeding, Bakewell and, 214;
the Collings and, 234-5.
Income and expenditure of landed classes (1688), 156.
Incubators, early, 132.
India,
imports from, 324;
wool from, 328.
Ine, laws of, as to fencing, 5.
Inherent capabilities of the soil, 301.
Inns, markets for produce, 323.
Inoculation of fruit trees, 131.
Intensive cultivation, 2.
Irish imports, 161, 262, 324-5, 328;
labourers, 209, 306.
Irrigation, 113, 132, 217.
Isle of Wight, 172n.
Italy, exports to, 349;
wool exported to, 39, 327.
Jamaica, wool from, 328.
Jersey cattle, 275, 339, (_See_ Alderney.)
Jus faldae, 64.
Justices regulate wages, 107.
Kent, 40, 128, 143-7, 157, 171, 173, 186, 259, 265, 283, 295, 306n., 309.
Kentish
cattle, 168;
sheep, 343, 344.
Kerry cattle, 343.
Kett, rising of, 96.
Ketton, 233, 235.
Kilns, hop, 151.
King's, Gregory, statistics, 120, 140, 141, 155, 258-9, 260, 353.
Kingston, Lord, estate rents of, 116.
Knights Hospitallers' estates, 40.
Labour,
cost of, per acre, 313;
services, 6, 12, 25, 27, 42, 45, 56, 61.
Labourer, character of, in eighteenth century, 175, 184, 201, 204,
205, 210;
condition of, at end of eighteenth century, 237-9;
condition of, in nineteenth century, 257, 266-8, 269, 270, 279,
283-4, 285, 290-2, 297, 311-2, 313-4, 315, 320, 355;
decrease of, 305, 311n., 315;
life of, in Middle Ages,53, 54, 67, 71, 103;
made a land-less man by enclosure, 196, 257;
number of (1688), 156;
savings of, 102-3, 156;
sports of, 55;
the home of the, 52, 158;
wages of, _see_ Wages.
Lambs, to fall March 25, 126.
Lammas, 4, 112, 137.
Lancashire, 44, 78, 106, 110, 147, 163, 167, 207, 216, 219, 282,
283, 284, 309, 312, 316, 320, 343, 346.
Land, value of, 19, 36, 40, 66, 117, 133, 149, 183, 243, 286-7,
293, 304, 310, 328, 348.
Landlords,
absentee, 184, 191;
of the fourteenth century, 48;
new class of, 59;
houses of the 103 (_see_ Cottages);
improve estates, 132, 162, 224, 232, 255, 268, 320;
protectionists, 160-1;
ignorant of estate management, 175, 193, 249, 281;
in nineteenth century, 265, 281, 304, 307, 309, 320-2;
position, weakened, 309;
relations of, and tenant, 218, 226, 282-3, 299, 301, 322;
suffered most from present depression, 320;
reserve sporting rights, 115;
take to farming, 182.
Landlordship, 6.
Lawes, Sir John, 275, 276, 314, 319.
Lawrence, John, 152, 165, 166, 167, 173, 337.
Laxton, Notts, 22.
Leases,45, 56, 57, 65, 81, 97, 113, 115-6, 121-2, 178, 218, 219,
263n., 272, 282, 283.
Leicester sheep, 215-6, 235, 274, 275, 343, 344.
Leicestershire, 8, 78, 79, 120, 151, 172, 174, 214-6, 268, 306n.,
309, 343.
'Lemmons', 93.
Leominster,
manor of, 18;
wool, 40, 171, 172n.
Liberi homines, 7.
Liebig, 275, 276.
Lime, 112, 141, 177, 187, 197.
Limestone sheep, 344, 346.
Liming the land, 77, 113, 218, 219, 246, 300.
Lincoln
red cattle, 343;
sheep, 215, 235, 275, 288, 343, 344, 346.
Lincolnshire, 3, 8, 40, 99, 100, 103, 123, 151, 168, 172, 250, 252, 255,
283, 306n., 307, 318, 321.
Liquorice, 143, 191.
Liverpool,
apples at, 188;
wheat at, 185.
Liverpool, Lord, 232, 264.
Live stock,
depreciation of, 306, 330;
exports of, 325-6, 330;
number of (1877 and 1907), 333-4;
in England (1688), 155, 164;
duty on, repealed, 280.
Locusts in England, 185.
London,
affects wages, 205;
attracts country folk, 209, 210;
potato grown near, 106;
carrots grown near, 167, 168;
roads near, 222;
sheep and cattle driven to, 221.
Longhorn cattle, 167, 216-7, 233, 234, 274, 275n., 336, 343.
Longmynd, 345.
Lonk sheep, 344, 346.
Lord of the manor, 6, 14, 19, 25, 42, 121, 127, 255;
small holder suffers at his hand, 121.
'Lord Wilton', 340.
Lucerne, 143, 167n., 191, 201.
Luffenham,
South, 22;
North, 103.
Luxury, spread of, an, 243, 264.
Lyttelton,
Sir H., 145;
Lord, 183.
Macadam, 220, 223, 230.
Machinery, use of, 271.
Madder, 17, 143, 191, 194.
Maidstone hops, 171.
Maize, imports of, 262, 296, 313.
Mangolds, 237, 331-2, 333, 353.
Manor, regulations of the, 13, 99.
Manor, the typical, 14.
Manorial balance sheets, 26, 65.
Manorial system, 6, 7, 18, 24, 45, 76, 97.
Manors, 6, 7, 14, 18, 25, 42, 45, 65, 97, 99, 118.
Mansion house, 14, 50.
Manufactures, influence of, on wages, 284, 297, 315.
Manures, 113, 119, 136, 144, 150-4, 177, 178, 179, 187, 191, 197, 201,
219, 221, 254, 275-6, 296, 299, 300, 304, 305, 314.
Manydown, Hants, 13.
Market gardening, 306, 308, 319.
Markham, Gervase, 127, 134-7, 146, 151, 171.
Marling, 77, 113, 183, 191, 197, 202, 219, 300.
Marshall, William, 188, 204, 207, 213, 222, 298, 314, 336, 338, 340.
Maryland, wool from, 328.
Mattocks for breaking clods, 129.
McCormick, 303.
McCulloch, 281, 324, 349.
Meadowland, 2, 19, 22, 40, 58, 155.
Meadows,
16, 30, 73, 99, 100, 118, 124, 148, 253, 258;
value of, 40, 58, 115-6, 139, 231.
Meat, imports of, 161, 305, 325.
Medlars, 136.
Meikle, 230, 236.
Menzies, 236.
Merino sheep, 233, 328n.
Messor, the, 13.
Middlesex, 41, 145, 306n.
Midland counties,
enclosure in, 120;
sheep in, 216, 218.
Migration of labourers, 44, 158n., 209, 238.
Milk, 63n., 168 (_see_ Dairy), 170, 205, 275, 297, 330.
Mill, suit of, 9.
Mills, excessive number of, 114.
Minimum wage proposed, 241.
Minister of Agriculture, 305.
Mixtil, or mastlin, or mesling, 9, 102, 125, 138, 207n.
Moles, 114, 124.
Molton Market, 341.
Monasteries, 68, 81.
Money payments, 24, 27, 45, 56.
Mortimer abuses the law, 74.
Moryson, 102, 105, 122.
Mountain sheep, 344, 346.
Mowing corn,
Fitzherbert's advice, 84, 125, 135, 138, 199, 354;
machines for, 303-4.
Mowing grass,
cost of, 34, 44, 65, 71, 109, 138, 142, 348, 354;
Fitzherbert's advice, 84.
Mulberries, 15, 146.
Murrain, 13, 42n., 68.
Mutton, price of, _see_ Prices.
New world, influx of precious metals from, 89, 111.
New Zealand, wool from, 328.
Newark, 157.
Nitrate of soda, 276.
Non-intercourse Act of United States, 242.
Norden, Sir John, 127-8, 220.
Norfolk, 8, 40, 45, 63n., 94, 96, 97, 167n., 169, 170, 182, 217,
224-8, 306n., 308, 340.
Norfolk, or four-course rotation, 183.
Normandy, 338.
North,
difference of wages between, and South, 283-5;
superior thrift in, 207-8.
Northamptonshire, 8, 78, 79, 120, 151, 157, 172, 222, 306n.
Northleach, rates at, 295.
Northumberland, 193n., 256, 295, 303, 309, 346.
Norwich, 169, 182.
Nottinghamshire, 8, 22, 78, 116, 144, 172, 237, 276, 283, 306n., 308, 309.
Nowton, Suffolk, 57.
Nucleated villages, 5.
Nuts, 136.
Oak timber,
value of, 137;
Coke's, 225-6.
Oakham, 110.
Oats, 20, 33, 65, 91, 124, 135-8, 142, 155, 227, 305, 331-2, 353;
cost of growing, in 1770, 199;
produce, per acre, in 1712, 105n.;
in 1770, 197-9;
Occupiers of land, 355.
'Old Comely', 216.
Olives, 93, 136.
Onions, 143, 332.
Open parishes, 158, 284.
Oranges, 93.
Orchards, 17, 128, 131, 143, 186, 188, 255, 332;
seventeenth century, 135-6.
Owners and occupiers, percentage of, 334.
Owners of Land, return, 260-1.
Owners, small, _see_ Holders, small.
Ox teams, 16, 31, 64, 84, 143, 147, 153, 191, 204, 340.
Oxen,
description of, in 1592, 104;
value of, 19, 20, 35, 57, 66, 114. (_See_ Cattle, price of.)
Oxford, 63, 273, 338.
Oxford Down sheep, 275, 288, 344, 345.
Oxfordshire, 24, 40, 78, 99, 145, 151.
Pack-horses, use of, 138.
Packing fruit in seventeenth century, 129, 130.
Paring and burning, 141, 153.
Parsnips, 143.
Pasture, breaking up, 218.
Pasture,
common, 2, 4, 16, 19, 73, 99, 113, 195;
often worth little, 256;
permanent, in Holdings Act, 299;
extent of, in 1688, 155;
in 1770, 196;
ploughed up during French War, 243;
sparing, 124.
Pasture land, price of, 41, 59, 115-7, 139.
Patents, 113, 236.
Peaches, 15, 93, 136.
Pears, 15, 93, 130, 131, 136, 143, 329, 333.
Peas, 33, 69, 124, 155, 200, 227, 331-2, 353.
Peasants' revolt, 60.
Peel's drainage loans, 272.
Penalty for breaking up pasture, 178.
Perry, 130.
Pestilences, 38, 42, 68, 79.
Piecework, 28, 163, 206.
Pigeons, number of, 49, 96, 105, 143, 244, 274, 275.
Pigs,
export of, 330;
feeding, 16, 125;
foot-and-mouth disease attacks, 290;
import of, 326;
number of, 333-4;
profit on, in 1763, 200;
size of, in 1592, 104;
value of, 20, 35n., 96, 200-3;
varieties of, 170, 346.
(_See_ Prices.)
Pinchbeck, 103.
Pitt, William, 238, 239.
Plat, Sir Hugh, 127, 152.
Plattes, Gabriel, 76, 127.
Pleuro-pneumonia, _see_ Cattle plagues.
Plot, 145.
Plough, eleventh- and twelfth-century, 17.
Ploughing,
cost of, 33, 65, 135, 141, 177, 179, 246;
months for, 17, 124.
Ploughland, the, 16, 18.
Ploughs and ploughing, 65, 83, 113, 125, 129, 135, 143, 150,
153, 177, 191, 203, 217, 218, 225, 273, 342, 354.
Plums, 15, 93, 130, 131, 136, 329, 332.
Poaching, 48;
by labourers, 55, 210, 248, 282, 291.
Population of England, 79, 89, 111, 120, 140, 156, 160, 163, 211, 240, 287.
Pork, price of, _see_ Prices.
Porter, 'Progress of Nation,' 276, 279, 286, 287.
Portugal, exports to, 349.
Potatoes, 106, 107, 112, 187, 191, 194, 227, 318, 331-3, 353;
disease, 277.
Poultry, 41n., 66, 80, 132, 169, 170 (_see_ Prices);
carrying, to London,171.
Praepositus, 12.
Precarii, or boon days, 9.
Precious metals,
influx of, 89, 111;
scarcity of, 66n.
Prices:
Apples, 15, 65, 188, 189.
Bacon and pork, 96, 102, 238, 239, 263, 313, 334.
Barley, 20, 35, 69, 114, 133, 138, 142, 155, 179, 223, 247,
312, 347, 350-3.
Beans, 35, 155, 180, 347.
Beef, 96, 102, 114, 164, 206n., 239, 240, 241, 242, 247, 262, 263, 265.
Bread, 206n., 207n., 223, 230, 242n., 280, 285, 286, 291.
Butter, 33, 66, 114, 206n., 241, 247, 285-6, 312, 334, 347.
Carts, 203.
Cattle, 19, 20, 35, 41, 65, 89, 105, 114, 119, 133, 146, 163, 165n.,
167, 169, 203, 235, 263, 307, 312, 347.
Cheese, 173-4, 206n., 241, 242, 312, 334, 347.
Clover, 166.
Eighteenth century, 145, 160, 163, 164, 165n., 166, 167, 169, 170,
172, 173-4, 179, 180, 186, 188, 189, 200, 203, 206n., 222, 223, 227,
229, 230, 231, 237, 238, 239, 240, 285, 341, 355.
Fifteenth century, 40, 66, 69, 355.
Fourteenth century, 39, 40, 41, 59, 65, 327, 355.
Flax,152.
Grapes, 144.
Harness, 203.
Hay, 157, 165n., 166, 241-2, 262, 347.
Hops, 87, 89, 150, 247, 298, 330, 347.
Horses, 19, 20, 35, 36, 114, 142, 165n., 203, 347, 355.
Horse-shoes,96.
Implements, 83, 138.
Malt, 89, 240, 241.
Milk, 168, 170, 312.
Mutton, 96, 10-2, 206n., 239, 240, 241, 247, 262, 263, 265, 313, 334.
Nineteenth century, 227, 235, 240, 242-4, 245, 247-8, 262, 263, 264-6,
267, 277-81, 285, 287, 293, 295, 296, 305, 306, 307, 312, 324,
329, 330, 334.
Oats, 20, 35, 69, 114, 138, 155, 180, 223, 241, 312, 347, 350-3.
Peas, 69, 155, 200, 247.
Pedigree cattle, 234, 235.
Pigs, 20, 41, 96, 200, 203, 347.
Potatoes, 106.
Poultry and eggs, 41, 96, 114, 133, 170, 247, 347.
Rabbits,174.
Rams, 202, 215, 235.
Rollers, 203.
Rye, 4, 16, 91, 125, 133, 138, 155, 347.
Saffron, 106.
Seventeenth century, 89, 110, 111, 114, 118, 119, 127, 133-4, 138,
142, 144, 146, 150, 152, 157, 159, 160, 328, 355.
Sheep, 20, 3511., 36, 41, 80, 114, 138, 165n., 203, 206n., 263,
312, 347.
Sixteenth century, 80, 87, 89, 95, 96, 102-6, 109, 355.
Straw, 179, 180.
Tenth century, 19.
Thirteenth century, 33, 35, 39, 355.
Twelfth century, 20.
Vetches, 155.
Waggons, 203-4.
Wheat, 20, 35, 66, 69, 89, 110, 114, 133, 134, 138, 142, 155,
157, 160, 163, 164, 179, 186, 223, 231, 237, 238, 239, 240,
241, 242-4, 247-8, 262, 265, 277-8, 281, 293, 306, 312,
334, 347, 350-3, 355.
Wine, 145.
Wool, 39, 40, 80, 89, 96, 114, 118, 119, 142, 163, 172, 173,
223, 239, 242, 285-6, 306, 312, 327, 328, 329, 347.
Prickly comfrey, 237.
Proclamation as to wages and prices, 42.
Production, increased cost of, 295, 313.
Prosperity,
agricultural, 28, 101, 114, 103, 183, 210-1, 229, 243-4, 246,
264, 287;
during French War, 243-6, 247, 264.
Protecting fruit from blight, Sec., 187.
Protection,
effect of, 250, 278-9, 281;
highest limit of, 248; 265, 266, 277-9.
Provender rents, 6.
Pruning fruit trees, 131, 136.
Pulverization of soil, 175.
Quarter Sessions, assessment of wages by, 108.
Quartly, Francis, 341.
Quiet Emptores, statute of, 29.
Quinces, 15, 136.
Quit, notice to, 300, 301, 302.
Rabbits,
rearing, 174;
reserved to landlord, 115.
Railway rates, 295-6.
Rake, horse, 304.
Raleigh introduces potatoes, 106.
Rams,
ewes to, 126, 138;
price of, 202, 215, 235.
Ramsey, 72.
Raspberries, 331.
Rates, 229, 238, 241, 245, 247, 248, 249, 255, 269, 284, 295, 296,
307, 314.
Rathgib, Jacob, 104.,
Reaping,
cost of, 34, 44, 65, 71, 109, 110, 138, 177, 179, 180, 246, 348, 354;
machines, 303-4;
time for, 124;
versus mowing corn, 135.
Red Polled cattle, 343.
Reeve, 12;
duties of a, 17.
Reigate, Flaunchford near, 64.
Rents:
Twelfth century, 27.
Thirteenth century, 36, 57, 75, 348.
Fourteenth century, 40, 41, 46, 65, 75, 348.
Fifteenth century, 57, 58, 66, 348.
Sixteenth century, 66, 76, 95, 115, 116, 348.
Seventeenth century, 115, 116, 117, 127, 133, 139, 143, 155, 161,
348, 354.
Eighteenth century, 116, 177, 179, 183, 189, 193n., 224, 227, 328,
348.
Nineteenth century, 243, 246, 248, 264, 266, 278, 285-6, 287, 297,
304, 306-9, 310, 319n., 321-2.
Repairs, _see_ Buildings, farm.
Restrictive covenants, _see_ Cultivation clauses.
Revival, recent, in agriculture, 320.
Revolt, Peasants', 60.
Revolution, agricultural and industrial, 162.
Ridges, high, 129, 175.
Rinderpest, _see_ Cattle plagues.
Riots, 185, 223, 262, 366,
Ripon, 147.
Roads, 21, 68, 105, 138, 171, 175, 182, 204, 210, 219, 220-3, 269,
274, 295.
Rock and Far Forest district, 318,
Rogers, Thorold, 107, 229.
Roller, farm, in seventeenth century, 135.
Rolling, 166, 194.
Romney Marsh sheep, 344.
Romsey Abbey, 15n.
Roots, few, used for cows, 200 (_see_ Turnips).
Roscommon sheep, 343.
Roses, 143.
Ross, John, of Warwick, 76.
Rot, _see_ Sheep rot.
Rotation of crops (_see_ Four-course and Three-field system) 225, 275.
Rothamsted, 275.
Roundsman system, 239.
Royal Agrlctttonal Society, 273-4, 281, 308.
Royal Society, helps agriculture, 114.
Russia,
imports rom, 323-4;
wool from, 328.
Rutland, 22, 102, 109, 110, 120, 134, 143, 151, 255, 268, 306n.;
Dukes of, 115, 286.
Rye, 4, 16, 91, 125, 133, 138, 155;
in Norfolk, 182, 276;
produce, per acre, in 1770, 197.
Rye-grass, 178-9, 218, 276.
Ryeland sheep, 344, 345, 346.
Saffron, 62, 106, 143, 167;
Walden, 106, 167.
Sainfoin, 112, 115, 143, 191, 194, 225, 331.
Saint Paul's, manors of, 16, 29, 50, 57, 58.
Sales, famous, 234n., 235, 338, 339.
Salt, value of, 26.
Samford Hall, 190.
Scotland,
cattle of, 336, 343;
wheat crop in, 332n.
Scott, Reynold, 89, 151.
Scottish cattle, 168-9.
Scudamore, Lord, 132, 3^8.
Seasons,
bad, 20, 42n., 66, 69, 89, 115, 157, 179, 184, 185, 186, 210,
223, 224, 237, 239, 242, 243, 247, 262, 265, 277, 292, 293,
294, 295, 297, 305;
good, 239, 244, 262, 266, 287.
Seed,
amount of, for wheat, 33, 67n.,84, 177, 179, 180, 227, 246;
for clover, 112, 166, 176, 218;
clover, price of, 166.
Sefton, Lord, estate of, 320n.
Selions, 318.
Self-binding reaper, 304.
Seneschal, 12.
Settled Land Acts, 305.
Settlement, law of parochial, 157-8, 209, 238, 269n., 284.
Settlements, family, 123, 259-60.
Seventeenth century, characteristics of, 111.
Sheaf-binding apparatus, 237.
Shearing sheep, 125.
Sheep, 94, 104, 126, 137, 146, 161, 200, 225, 233, 236, 263, 274,
275, 288, 290;
diseases of, 84;
export of, 326, 330 (_see_ Live stock);
improvement of, 37, 164, 202;
number of,
in 1867, 288;
in 1877 and 1907, 333-4;
price of, _see_ Prices;
varieties of, 171, 172, 215-7, 233, 235, 275, 288, 343-6;
washing, cost of, 65, 125, 354.
Sheep-rot, 184, 242, 265n., 294.
Shepherd, wages of, 61, 71, 87, 109.
Shire horse, 35, 335;
Society, 335.
Shoeing, 36, 65, 84, 203.
Shorthorn cattle, 167, 225, 233-5, 274, 288, 336-8, 339, 342.
Shows, Agricultural, 233, 273-5, 341.
Shropshire, 11n., 16n., 159, 173, 219, 220, 225, 250, 339;
sheep, 275, 288, 344, 345, 346.
Siberian Railway, 324.
Sicks, uncultivated patches, 99n.
Sinclair, Sir J., 229, 230, 232.
Sittingboume, 128, 143.
Sixteenth century, character of, 89.
Slaves, 8, 11, 20.
Smith, Adam, 134, 210.
Smith of Deanston, 214, 271-2.
Smithfield, 168, 169;
cattle show, 218, 273, 339;
prices at, 239, 240, 241, 247, 265.
Smyth, John, 111.
Society, Royal Agricultural, 193.
Society for Encouragement of Arts, &c., 194> 227, 303.
Socmen, 7.
Somerset, 19, 58, 107, 168, 250, 309, 340;
sheep, 344.
Somerville, Loid, 231.
Southams cattle, 342.
Southdown sheep, 217, 225, 233, 236, 263, 274, 275, 344, 345.
Spade, prejudice against, 112, 143;
for hops, 150.
Spain,
exports to, 349;
imports from, 323.
Spanish wool, 38-9, 328.
Speculation,
in land, 243;
in produce, 305.
Speenhamland Act, 237-8.
Spencer, Earl, 273.
Sporting rights reserved, 115.
Spraying fruit, 136.
Squatters, 220, 256.
Squire, the, 103, 128, 137, 140, 193, 211-2.
Stafford, Marquis of, 219.
Staffordshire, 3, 44, 78, 122, 219, 286, 295, 309.
Statesmen, 311.
Statistics, agricultural, 230, 231, 232, 277, 288 (_see_ King, Gregory),
331-2, 353.
Statute of labourers, 43.
Statutes _quoted_:
20 Hen. III. c. 4, 73.
25 Edw. III. 2. c. 1, 43.
34 Edw. III. c. 20, 63.
12 Ric. II. c. 4, 61.
12 Ric. II. c. 5, 64.
12 Ric. II. c. 6, 55.
13 Ric. II. c. 13, 55.
15 Ric. II. c. 5, 71.
17 Ric. II. c. 7, 63.
4 Hen. IV. c. 14, 67n.
7 Hen. IV. c. 17, 70.
9 Hen. V. c. 5, 68n.
3 Hen. VI. c. 2, 326.
3 Hen. VI. c. 4, 327.
4 Hen. VI. c. 5, 64.
15 Hen. VI. c. 2, 69.
23 Hen. VI. c. 12, 71, 87.
3 Edw. IV. c. 2, 70.
3 Edw. IV. c. 5, 7in.
22 Edw. IV. c. 1, 7in.
4 Hen. VII. c. 19, 79, 94, 117.
11 Hen. VII. c. 13, 325.
11 Hen. VII. c. 22, 87.
6 Hen. VIII. c. 3, 87.
6 Hen. VIII. c. 5, 79.
21 Hen. VIII. c. 8, 86.
22 Hen. VIII. c. 7, 326.
24 Hen. VIII c. 3, 102.
24 Hen. VIII. c. 4, 105.
24 Hen. VIII. c. 10, 82n.
25 Hen, VIII. c. 1, 86.
25 Hen. VIII. c. 13, 80.
27 Hen. VIII. c. 6, 85.
27 Hen. VIII. c. 22, 94.
32 Hen. VIII. c. 13, 85.
I Edw. VI. c. 5, 326.
3 and 4 Edw. VI. c. 19, 86.
5 Edw. VI. c. 14, 86.
2 and 3 Phil. and Mary, c. 3, 96.
5 Eliz. c. 4, 107.
5 Eliz. c. 5, 105.
8 Eliz. c. 3, 326.
8 Eliz. c. 15, 82n.
13 Eliz. c. 25, 96.
14 Eliz. c. 11, 82n.
31 Eliz. c. 7, 121n., 159.
39 Eliz. c. 1, 117.
39 Eliz, c. 2, 118.
39 Eliz. c. 18, 82n.
43 Eliz. c. 2, 296.
1 Jac. I. c. 18, 150.
21 Jac. I. c. 28, 118n.
12 Car. II. c. 4, 161.
13 and 14 Car. II. c. 18, 326, 327.
14 Car. II. c. 12, 157.
15 Car. II. c. 7, 134, 326.
18 Car. II. c. 2, 161, 326.
22 Car. II. c. 13, 326.
32 Car. II. c. 2, 161, 326.
3 W. and M. c. 2, 158.
8 and 9 W. and M. c. 30, 158.
7 and 8 Wm. III. c. 28, 327.
36 Geo. III. c. 23, 238.
41 Geo. III. c. 109, 231-2.
9 Geo. IV. c. 60, 278.
4 and 5 Wm. IV. c. 76, 269.
6 and 7 Wm. IV. c. 71, 270.
5 Vict. c. 14, 278.
9 and 10 Vict. c. 22, 280.
9 and 10 Vict. c. 23, 280.
14 and 15 Vict. c. 25, 301.
30 and 31 Vict. c. 130, 292.
38 and 39 Vict. c. 92, 299.
43 and 44 Vict. c. 47, 303.
46 and 47 Vict. c. 61, 300.
59 and 60 Vict. c. 16, 314n.
63 and 64 Vict. c. 50, 301.
1 Edw. VII. c. 13, 314n.
6 Edw. VII. c. 56, 301.
7 Edw. VII. c. 54, 316.
Steam,
applied to threshing, 237;
cultivator, 304.
Stilton cheese, 173-4.
Stinting the common pasture, 4.
Stock and land leases, 57.
Stocking a farm, 170, 203.
Stores, public grain, 133, 264.
Stott, the, or affer, 35, 57, 65.
Stourbridge Fair, 171, 172n.
Stratfieldsaye, 272.
Straw,
as winter food for cattle, 126, 217;
price of, 179, 180, 330.
Strawberries, 15, 329, 331.
Stubble, grazing of, 4, 125.
Suffolk, 8, 30, 40, 57, 63n., 78, 112, 128, 147, 166, 168, 170,
173, 174, 188, 207, 225, 238, 284, 306n., 309, 313;
Punch, 335;
sheep, 275, 344, 345.
Supplies of com per head, 330 (_see_ Wheat, home supplies).
Surrey, 64, 128, 143, 144, 168, 180, 283, 306n.
Surveyor, the seventeeiith-century, 127.
Sussex, 54, 78, 259, 263, 283, 306n.;
cattle, 274, 288, 336, 340, 343.
Swanage, 262.
Swedes, 227, 237, 276, 288, 331-2, 333.
'Swing' riots, 266.
Taltarum's case, effect of, 122.
Tamworth pigs, 346.
Taunton,
manor of, 18;
good fanning near, 128.
Taxes, 247, 263-4, 307, 310;
weight of, 183, 191, 229, 245, 246, 249, 250, 263, 320, 321.
Tea,
drinking, 205, 207, 213, 291;
price of, 205.
Teams, composition of, 16.
Telford, 220, 222.
Tenant farmers,
assist in agricultural progress, 162;
number of, 141, 156;
origin of, 46, 119.
Tenant-right, 283.
Teeswater cattle, 337.
Tewkesbury, 255.
Thatchers, 139, 354.
Thomson of Banchory, 276.
Thorney and Woburn estates, 321.
Three-field system, 4, 99.
Threshing,
cost of, 34, 44, 65, 163, 179, 180, 198-9, 246;
machine, 230, 236-7, 282;
time for, 17, 126.
Tillage,
decrease of, 79, 80, 94;
encouragement of, 79, 108, 117-8;
reaction against, 118.
(_See_ Arable, _and_ Grass.)
Timber (_see_ Oak timber), 227;
spoils crops, 282.
Tiptree, 319.
Tithe,
dispute, 102;
on turnips, 166;
rent charge, 270.
Tithes, 116, 144, 151, 189, 195, 230, 332, 247, 248, 249, 250,
270, 305, 307.
Tooke, 179, 266.
_Tours_, Young's, 190, 192.
Towns, movement of rural population towards, 64, 70, 108, 185, 192,
195, 209, 315, 316-7.
Townshend, Lord, 163, 182-3, 192, 193.
_Treatise on Husbandry_, 33, 54.
Tull, Jethro, 152, 163, 174-7, 178, 180, 183, 193, 200-1, 204.
Turkeys, 170.
Turkish dominions, imports from, 323.
Turnip cutters, 276.
Turnip fly, remedies for, 166.
Turnips, 93, 111, 112, 115, 141, 143, 157, 164, 166, 168, 178, 183,
251, 331-2, 333;
cost of growing, in 1770, 198;
injure wool, 329;
sheep first fattened on, 112;
spread of, in eighteenth century, 165, 166, 179, 191, 194, 200,
201, 225;
varieties of, in 1720, 165.
Tusser, 63, 90, 91, 92, 101, 102, 105, 111, 124, 126.
Two-field system, 3.
'Twopenny', 216.
Underwood, value of, in seventeenth century, 137.
Unions, Agricultural Labourers', 291-2.
United States, _see_ America.
Unreasonable disturbance, 302.
Upwey, 318.
Vanghan, Rowland, 132-3.
Vegetables, 15, 93, 106, 112n., 143, 236n.
Ventnor, vineyard at, 145.
Vermin, destruction of, 82, 100, 244.
Vermuyden, Cornelius, 123.
Vetches, 125, 155, 331.
Village, the, of the eighteenth century, 164.
Village smith, the, 35.
Villeins, 6, 7, 8, 18, 24, 29, 42, 45;
disappearance of, 46, 59, 60, 105.
Vills or villages, 2, 5, 7, 15, 98, 119.
Vineyards, 15, 16, 111, 144-5.
Virgate, 8.
Virginia,
potatoes from, 106;
wool from, 328.
Wages:
Twelfth century, 27.
Thirteenth century, 27, 28, 34, 348, 355.
Fourteenth century, 27, 28, 41, 43, 59, 61, 62, 348, 355.
Fifteenth century, 67, 71, 348, 355.
Sixteenth century, 67, 87, 348, 355.
Seventeenth century, 119, 138, 139, 348, 355.
Eighteenth century, 163, 164, 184, 203, 205-6, 210, 237,
238, 240, 285, 348, 354-5.
Nineteenth century, 241, 242, 249, 267, 268, 283-4, 285, 290-2, 297,
309, 311, 312, 313, 315, 355, 356.
Wages,
on a farm in 1805, 247;
regulated by statute, 43, 61, 71, 87;
by Justices, 107, 109, 110.
Waggons, 153, 204.
Wainage, 8.
Wales, cattle of, 167, 336, 338, 343.
Wallachia and Moldavia, imports from, 323.
Walsingham states demands of villeins, 60.
Wars, effect of, 38, 68, 71, 193, 205, 212, 229, 237, 260, 286, 287, 341.
Warwickshire, 40, 77, 78, 94, 110, 172, 173, 213, 215, 216, 272, 282,
290, 306n., 309, 343.
Waste land, 231;
committee on, 255n., 256;
good crops from the, 119;
Young and, 191.
Water carriage, cheapness of, 21, 173.
Weaning lambs, time for, 125.
Weaving, 70, 76, 110, 257.
Webster of Canley, 216.
Weeding hook and tongs, 84, 152.
Weeds, 125, 180, 201.
Week work, 8.
Welsh mountain sheep, 344, 346.
Wensleydale sheep, 343, 345.
Westcar of Creslow, 339.
Westcote, 128.
Westmoreland, 216, 295, 346.
Weston, Sir R., introduces clover, 111, 127, 141.
Weyhill Fair, 172.
Wheat,
acreage tinder, in 1907, 331-2;
consumption of, per head, 279;
cost of growing, 177, 180, 198, 199, 246, 307;
crops, 33, 67, 77, 91, 129, 142, 155, 165, 179, 180, 197-9, 227,
246, 282, 285, 286, 332;
cultivation of, 4, 16, 32, 36, 113, 125, 135, 177-9, 180, 184, 353;
different kinds of, 146, 107;
home supplies of, 277, 279, 313, 330;
price of, _see_ Prices.
White, Gilbert, 223.
Wilton, hops near, 171.
Wiltshire, 143, 174, 253, 268, 283, 286, 309, 312, 313;
sheep, 345.
Winchelsea, Lord, 255, 257, 268.
Winchester, 147, 150.
Wine, 144-5.
Wire binder, 304.
Wirral, 66.
Wisbech, 318.
Woad, 17, 152.
Women, work of, on the farm, 62, 85, 206, 316.
Wood, W. A., 304.
Woods, 2, 16, 59, 74, 78, 115, 125, 136, 155.
Woodstock, 53.
Wool, 37, 38-41, 69, 75, 80, 94, 104, 114, 118, 119, 142, 161,
163, 171-3, 184, 223, 285, 329, 354, 355;
export of, _see_ Exports;
import of, _see_ Imports;
price of, _see_ Prices.
Wool,
custom of picking refuse, 100;
storing, 125.
Worcestershire, 74, 128, 136, 143, 171, 306.
Work, hours of, 87, 147, 291.
Worlidge, John, 127, 131, 132, 142-8, 150-4, 165.
Worsley, Sir R., 145.
Yeoman, the, 50, 71, 123, 128, 140, 156, 207, 258-61, 310, 320;
house of, 103.
Yeomen purchase lands of gentry, 122.
Yorkshire, 15, 78, 110, 138-9, 167, 168, 207, 225, 253, 283, 295, 306n.,
309, 337, 343, 346.
Young, Arthur, 160, 162, 163, 172, 180, 182, 188, 190-3, 194, 197, 200-6,
210, 211, 222, 224, 230, 232, 236, 240, 253, 255, 257, 260, 284,
285, 288n., 298, 314, 317, 335, 336, 337, 343, 353, 355;
opposed to drilling, 178;
pet aversions of, 191;
statements of, as to growth of clover, 112.

Soil, also commonly referred to as earth, is a mixture of organic matter, minerals, gases, water, and organisms that together support the life of plants and soil organisms. Some scientific definitions distinguish dirt from soil by restricting the former term specifically to displaced soil.
Soil consists of a solid collection of minerals and organic matter (the soil matrix), as well as a porous phase (Pore space) that holds gases (the soil atmosphere) and a liquid phase that holds water and dissolved substances both organic and inorganic, in ionic or in molecular form (the soil solution). Accordingly, soil is a complex three-state system of solids, liquids, and gases. Soil is a product of several factors: the influence of climate, relief (elevation, orientation, and slope of terrain), organisms, and the soil's parent materials (original minerals) interacting over time. It continually undergoes development through numerous physical, chemical, and biological processes, which include weathering with associated erosion. Given its complexity and strong internal connectedness, soil ecologists regard soil as an ecosystem.
Most soils have a dry bulk density (density of soil taking into account voids when dry) between 1.1 and 1.6 g/cm3, though the soil particle density is much higher, in the range of 2.6 to 2.7 g/cm3. Little of the soil of planet Earth is older than the Pleistocene and none is older than the Cenozoic, although fossilized soils are preserved from as far back as the Archean.
Collectively, the Earth's body of soil is called the pedosphere. The pedosphere interfaces with the lithosphere, the hydrosphere, the atmosphere, and the biosphere. Soil has four important functions:
as a medium for plant growth
as a means of water storage, water supply, and water purification
as a modifier of Earth's atmosphere
as a habitat for soil organisms
All of these functions, in their turn, modify the soil and its properties.
Soil science has two basic branches of study: edaphology and pedology. Edaphology studies the influence of soils on living things. Pedology focuses on the formation, description (morphology), and classification of soils in their natural environment. In engineering terms, soil is included in the broader concept of regolith, which also includes other loose material that lies above the bedrock, as can be found on the Moon and other celestial objects.
== Functions ==
Soil acts as an engineering medium, a habitat for soil organisms, a recycling system for nutrients and organic wastes, a regulator of water quality, a modifier of atmospheric composition, and a medium for plant growth, making it a critically important provider of ecosystem services. Since soil has a tremendous range of available niches and habitats, it contains a prominent part of the Earth's genetic diversity. A gram of soil can contain billions of organisms, belonging to thousands of species, mostly microbial and largely still unexplored. Soil has a mean prokaryotic density of roughly 108 organisms per gram, whereas the ocean has no more than 107 prokaryotic organisms per milliliter (gram) of seawater. Organic carbon held in soil is eventually returned to the atmosphere through the process of respiration carried out by heterotrophic organisms, but a substantial part is retained in the soil in the form of soil organic matter; tillage usually increases the rate of soil respiration, leading to the depletion of soil organic matter. Since plant roots need oxygen, aeration is an important characteristic of soil. This ventilation can be accomplished via networks of interconnected soil pores, which also absorb and hold rainwater making it readily available for uptake by plants. Since plants require a nearly continuous supply of water, but most regions receive sporadic rainfall, the water-holding capacity of soils is vital for plant survival.
Soils can effectively remove impurities, kill disease agents, and degrade contaminants, this latter property being called natural attenuation. Typically, soils maintain a net absorption of oxygen and methane and undergo a net release of carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide. Soils offer plants physical support, air, water, temperature moderation, nutrients, and protection from toxins. Soils provide readily available nutrients to plants and animals by converting dead organic matter into various nutrient forms.
Soil is a major component of the Earth's ecosystem. The world's ecosystems are impacted in far-reaching ways by the processes carried out in the soil, with effects ranging from ozone depletion and global warming to rainforest destruction and water pollution. With respect to Earth's carbon cycle, soil acts as an important carbon reservoir, and it is potentially one of the most reactive to human disturbance and climate change. As the planet warms, it has been predicted that soils will add carbon dioxide to the atmosphere due to increased biological activity at higher temperatures, a positive feedback (amplification). This prediction has, however, been questioned on consideration of more recent knowledge on soil carbon turnover.
== Composition ==
A typical soil is about 50% solids (45% mineral and 5% organic matter), and 50% voids (or pores) of which half is occupied by water and half by gas. The percent soil mineral and organic content can be treated as a constant (in the short term), while the percent soil water and gas content is considered highly variable whereby a rise in one is simultaneously balanced by a reduction in the other. The pore space allows for the infiltration and movement of air and water, both of which are critical for life existing in soil. Compaction, a common problem with soils, in particular under heavy machinery traffic, reduces this space, preventing air and water from reaching plant roots and soil organisms.
Given sufficient time, an undifferentiated soil will evolve a soil profile that consists of two or more layers, referred to as soil horizons. These differ in one or more properties such as in their texture, structure, density, porosity, consistency, temperature, color, and reactivity. The horizons differ greatly in thickness and generally lack sharp boundaries; their development is dependent on the type of parent material, the processes that modify those parent materials (e.g. mineral weathering), and the soil-forming factors that influence those processes. The biological influences on soil properties (e.g. bioturbation) are strongest near the surface, while the geochemical influences on soil properties increase with depth. Mature soil profiles typically include three basic master horizons: A, B, and C. The solum normally includes the A and B horizons. The living component of the soil is largely confined to the solum, and is generally more prominent in the A horizon. It has been suggested that the pedon, a column of soil extending vertically from the surface to the underlying parent material and large enough to show the characteristics of all its horizons, could be subdivided in the humipedon (the living part, where most soil organisms are dwelling, corresponding to the humus form), the copedon (in intermediary position, where most weathering of minerals takes place) and the lithopedon (in contact with the subsoil).
The soil texture is determined by the relative proportions of the individual particles of sand, silt, and clay that make up the soil. The interaction of the individual mineral particles with organic matter, water, gases via biotic and abiotic processes causes those particles to flocculate (stick together) to form aggregates or peds. Where these aggregates can be identified, a soil can be said to be developed, and can be described further in terms of color, porosity, consistency, reaction (acidity), etc.
Water is a critical agent in soil development due to its involvement in the dissolution, precipitation, erosion, transport, and deposition of the materials of which a soil is composed. The mixture of water and dissolved or suspended materials that occupy the soil pore space is called the soil solution. Since soil water is never pure water, but contains hundreds of dissolved organic and mineral substances, it may be more accurately called the soil solution. Water is central to the dissolution, precipitation and leaching of minerals from the soil profile. Finally, water affects the type of vegetation that grows in a soil, which in turn affects the development of the soil, a complex feedback which is exemplified in the dynamics of banded vegetation patterns in semi-arid regions.
Soils supply plants with nutrients, most of which are held in place by particles of clay and organic matter (colloids) The nutrients may be adsorbed on clay mineral surfaces, bound within clay minerals (absorbed), or bound within organic compounds as part of the living organisms or dead soil organic matter (humus). These bound nutrients interact with soil water to buffer the soil solution composition (attenuate changes in the soil solution) as soils wet up or dry out, as plants take up nutrients, as salts are leached, or as acids or alkalis are added.
Plant nutrient availability is affected by soil pH, which is a measure of the hydrogen ion activity in the soil solution. Soil pH is a function of many soil forming factors, and is generally lower (more acidic) where weathering is more advanced.
Most plant nutrients, with the exception of nitrogen, fixed from the atmosphere, originate from the minerals that make up the soil parent material. Some nitrogen also originates from rain as dilute nitric acid and ammonia, but most of the nitrogen is available in soils as a result of nitrogen fixation by diazotroph bacteria (e.g. cyanobacteria with heterocysts, Clostridium). Once in the soil-plant system, most nutrients are recycled through living organisms, plant and microbial residues (soil organic matter), mineral-bound forms (humus), and the soil solution. Both living soil organisms (microbes, animals and plant roots) and soil organic matter are of critical importance to this recycling, and thereby to soil formation and soil fertility. Microbial enzymes may release nutrients from minerals or organic matter for use by plants and other microorganisms, sequester (incorporate) them into living cells, or cause their loss from the soil by volatilisation (loss to the atmosphere as gases) or leaching.
== Formation ==
Soil is said to be formed when organic matter has accumulated and colloids are washed downward, leaving deposits of clay, humus, iron oxide, carbonate, and gypsum, producing a distinct layer called the B horizon. This is a somewhat arbitrary definition as mixtures of sand, silt, clay and humus will support biological and agricultural activity before that time. These constituents are moved from one level to another by water (leaching) and animal activity (bioturbation). As a result, layers (horizons) form in the soil profile. The alteration (weathering) and movement of materials within a soil causes the formation of distinctive soil horizons. However, more recent definitions of soil embrace soils without any organic matter, such as those regoliths that formed on Mars and analogous conditions in planet Earth deserts.
An example of the development of a soil would begin with the weathering of lava flow bedrock, which would produce the purely mineral-based parent material from which the soil texture forms. Soil development would proceed most rapidly from bare rock of recent flows in a warm climate, under heavy and frequent rainfall. Under such conditions, plants (in a first stage nitrogen-fixing lichens and cyanobacteria then epilithic higher plants) become established very quickly on basaltic lava, even though there is very little organic material. Basaltic minerals commonly weather relatively quickly, according to the Goldich dissolution series. The plants are supported by the porous rock as it is filled with nutrient-bearing water that carries minerals dissolved from the rocks. Crevasses and pockets, local topography of the rocks, would hold fine materials and harbour plant roots. The developing plant roots are associated with mineral-weathering mycorrhizal fungi that assist in breaking up the porous lava, and by these means organic matter and a finer mineral soil accumulate with time. Such initial stages of soil development have been described on volcanoes, inselbergs, and glacial moraines.
Soil formation is governed by five interrelated soil formation factors — climate (CL), organisms (O), topography or relief (R), parent material (P), and time (T) — which together drive the development and evolution of soil. Soil formation factors are often referred to by the acronym CLORPT.
== Physical properties ==
The physical properties of soils, in order of decreasing importance for ecosystem services such as crop production, are texture, structure, bulk density, porosity, consistency, temperature, colour and resistivity. Soil texture is determined by the relative proportion of the three kinds of soil mineral particles, called soil separates: sand, silt, and clay. At the next larger scale, soil structures called peds or more commonly soil aggregates are created from the soil separates when iron oxides, carbonates, clay, silica and humus, coat particles and cause them to adhere into larger, relatively stable secondary structures. Soil bulk density, when determined at standardized moisture conditions, is an estimate of soil compaction. Soil porosity consists of the void part of the soil volume and is occupied by gases or water. Soil consistency is the ability of soil materials to stick together. Soil temperature and colour are self-defining. Resistivity refers to the resistance to conduction of electric currents and affects the rate of corrosion of metal and concrete structures which are buried in soil. These properties vary through the depth of a soil profile, i.e. through soil horizons. Most of these properties determine the aeration of the soil and the ability of water to infiltrate and to be held within the soil.
== Soil moisture ==
Soil water content can be measured as volume or weight. Soil moisture levels, in order of decreasing water content, are saturation, field capacity, wilting point, air dry, and oven dry. Field capacity describes a drained wet soil at the point water content reaches equilibrium with gravity. Irrigating soil above field capacity risks percolation losses. Wilting point describes the dry limit for growing plants. During growing season, soil moisture is unaffected by plant functional groups or species richness while it varies with species composition.
Available water capacity is the amount of water held in a soil profile available to plants. As water content drops, plants have to work against increasing forces of adhesion and sorptivity to withdraw water. Irrigation scheduling avoids moisture stress by replenishing depleted water before stress is induced.
Capillary action is responsible for moving groundwater from wet regions of the soil to dry areas. Subirrigation designs (e.g., wicking beds, sub-irrigated planters) rely on capillarity to supply water to plant roots. Capillary action can result in an evaporative concentration of salts, causing land degradation through salination.
Soil moisture measurement—measuring the water content of the soil, as can be expressed in terms of volume or weight—can be based on in situ probes (e.g., capacitance probes, neutron probes), or remote sensing methods. Soil moisture measurement is an important factor in determining changes in soil biological activity.
== Soil gas ==
The atmosphere of soil, or soil gas, is very different from the atmosphere above. The consumption of oxygen by microbes and plant roots, and their release of carbon dioxide, decreases oxygen and increases carbon dioxide concentration. Atmospheric CO2 concentration is 0.04%, but in the soil pore space it may range from 10 to 100 times that level, thus potentially contributing to the inhibition of root respiration. Calcareous soils regulate CO2 concentration by carbonate buffering, contrary to acid soils in which all CO2 respired accumulates in the soil pore system. At extreme levels, CO2 is toxic. This suggests a possible negative feedback control of soil CO2 concentration through its inhibitory effects on root and microbial respiration (also called soil respiration). In addition, the soil voids are saturated with water vapour, at least until the point of maximal hygroscopicity, beyond which a vapour-pressure deficit occurs in the soil pore space. Adequate porosity is necessary, not just to allow the penetration of water, but also to allow gases to diffuse in and out. Movement of gases is by diffusion from high concentrations to lower, the diffusion coefficient decreasing with soil compaction. Oxygen from above atmosphere diffuses in the soil where it is consumed and levels of carbon dioxide in excess of above atmosphere diffuse out with other gases (including greenhouse gases) as well as water vapor. Soil texture and structure strongly affect soil porosity and gas diffusion. It is the total pore space (porosity) of soil, not the pore size, and the degree of pore interconnection (or conversely pore sealing), together with water content, air turbulence and temperature, that determine the rate of diffusion of gases into and out of soil. Platy soil structure and soil compaction (low porosity) impede gas flow, and a deficiency of oxygen may encourage anaerobic bacteria to reduce (strip oxygen) from nitrate NO3 to the gases N2, N2O, and NO, which are then lost to the atmosphere, thereby depleting the soil of nitrogen, a detrimental process called denitrification. Aerated soil is also a net sink of methane (CH4) but a net producer of methane (a strong heat-trapping greenhouse gas) when soils are depleted of oxygen and subject to elevated temperatures.
Soil atmosphere is also the seat of emissions of volatiles other than carbon and nitrogen oxides from various soil organisms, e.g. roots, bacteria, fungi, animals. These volatiles are used as chemical cues, making soil atmosphere the seat of interaction networks playing a decisive role in the stability, dynamics and evolution of soil ecosystems. Biogenic soil volatile organic compounds are exchanged with the aboveground atmosphere, in which they are just 1–2 orders of magnitude lower than those from aboveground vegetation.
Humans can get some idea of the soil atmosphere through the well-known 'after-the-rain' scent, when infiltering rainwater flushes out the whole soil atmosphere after a drought period, or when soil is excavated, a bulk property attributed in a reductionist manner to particular biochemical compounds such as petrichor or geosmin.
== Solid phase (soil matrix) ==
Soil particles can be classified by their chemical composition (mineralogy) as well as their size. The particle size distribution of a soil, its texture, determines many of the properties of that soil, in particular hydraulic conductivity and water potential, but the mineralogy of those particles can strongly modify those properties. The mineralogy of the finest soil particles, clay, is especially important.
== Soil biodiversity ==
Large numbers of microbes, animals, plants and fungi are living in soil. However, biodiversity in soil is much harder to study as most of this life is invisible, hence estimates about soil biodiversity have been unsatisfactory. A recent study suggested that soil is likely home to 59 ± 15% of the species on Earth. Enchytraeidae (potworms) have the greatest percentage of their species living in soil (98.6%), followed by fungi (90%), plants (85.5%), and termites (Isoptera) (84.2%). Many other groups of animals have substantial fractions of species living in soil, e.g. about 30% of insects, and close to 50% of arachnids. While most vertebrates live above ground (ignoring aquatic species), many species are fossorial, that is, they live in soil (e.g. moles, pocket gophers, voles, blind snakes), an adaptation to subterranean life thought to be inherited from past global ecological crises.
== Chemistry ==
The chemistry of a soil determines its ability to supply available plant nutrients and affects its physical properties and the health of its living population. In addition, a soil's chemistry also determines its corrosivity, stability, and ability to absorb pollutants and to filter water. It is the surface chemistry of mineral and organic colloids that determines soil's chemical properties. A colloid is a small, insoluble particle ranging in size from 1 nanometer to 1 micrometer, thus small enough to remain suspended by Brownian motion in a fluid medium without settling. Most soils contain organic colloidal particles called humus as well as the inorganic colloidal particles of clays. The very high specific surface area of colloids and their net electrical charges give soil its ability to hold and release ions. Negatively charged sites on colloids attract and release cations in what is referred to as cation exchange. Cation-exchange capacity is the amount of exchangeable cations per unit weight of dry soil and is expressed in terms of milliequivalents of positively charged ions per 100 grams of soil (or centimoles of positive charge per kilogram of soil; cmolc/kg). Similarly, positively charged sites on colloids can attract and release anions in the soil, giving the soil anion-exchange capacity.
=== Cation and anion exchange ===
The cation exchange, that takes place between colloids and soil water, buffers (moderates) soil pH, alters soil structure, and purifies percolating water by adsorbing cations of all types, both useful and harmful.
The negative or positive charges on colloid particles make them able to hold cations or anions, respectively, to their surfaces. The charges result from four sources.
Isomorphous substitution occurs in clay during its formation, when lower-valence cations substitute for higher-valence cations in the crystal structure. Substitutions in the outermost layers are more effective than for the innermost layers, as the electric charge strength drops off as the square of the distance. The net result is oxygen atoms with net negative charge and the ability to attract cations.
Edge-of-clay oxygen atoms are not in balance ionically as the tetrahedral and octahedral structures are incomplete.
Hydroxyls may substitute for oxygens of the silica layers, a process called hydroxylation. When the hydrogens of the clay hydroxyls are ionised into solution, they leave the oxygen with a negative charge (anionic clays).
Hydrogens of humus hydroxyl groups may also be ionised into solution, leaving, similarly to clay, an oxygen with a negative charge.
Cations held to the negatively charged colloids resist being washed downward by water and are at first out of reach of plant roots, thereby preserving the soil fertility in areas of moderate rainfall and low temperatures.
There is a hierarchy in the process of cation exchange on colloids, as cations differ in the strength of adsorption by the colloid and hence their ability to replace one another (ion exchange). If present in equal amounts in the soil water solution:
Al3+ replaces H+ replaces Ca2+ replaces Mg2+ replaces K+ same as NH+4 replaces Na+
If one cation is added in large amounts, it may replace the others by the sheer force of its numbers. This is called law of mass action. This is largely what occurs with the addition of cationic fertilisers (potash, lime).
As the soil solution becomes more acidic (low pH, meaning an abundance of H+), the other cations more weakly bound to colloids are pushed into solution as hydrogen ions occupy exchange sites (protonation). A low pH may cause the hydrogen of hydroxyl groups to be pulled into solution, leaving charged sites on the colloid available to be occupied by other cations. This ionisation of hydroxy groups on the surface of soil colloids creates what is described as pH-dependent surface charges. Unlike permanent charges developed by isomorphous substitution, pH-dependent charges are variable and increase with increasing pH. Freed cations can be made available to plants but are also prone to be leached from the soil, possibly making the soil less fertile. Plants are able to excrete H+ into the soil through the synthesis of organic acids and by that means, change the pH of the soil near the root and push cations off the colloids, thus making those available to the plant.
==== Cation exchange capacity (CEC) ====
Cation exchange capacity is the soil's ability to remove cations from the soil water solution and sequester those to be exchanged later as the plant roots release hydrogen ions to the solution. CEC is the amount of exchangeable hydrogen cations (H+) that will combine with 100 grams dry weight of soil and whose measure is one milliequivalent per 100 grams of soil (1 meq/100 g). Hydrogen ions have a single charge and one-thousandth of a gram (1 mg) of hydrogen ions per 100 grams dry soil gives a measure of one milliequivalent of hydrogen ion. Calcium, with an atomic weight 40 times that of hydrogen and with a valence of two, converts to (40 ÷ 2) × 1 milliequivalent = 20 milliequivalents of hydrogen ion per 100 grams of dry soil or 20 meq/100 g. The modern measure of CEC is expressed as centimoles of positive charge per kilogram (cmol/kg) of oven-dry soil.
Most of the soil's CEC occurs on clay and humus colloids, and the lack of those in hot, humid, wet climates (such as tropical rainforests), due to fast leaching and decomposition, respectively, explains the apparent lack of fertility of tropical soils. Live plant roots also have some CEC, linked to their specific surface area.
==== Anion exchange capacity (AEC) ====
Anion exchange capacity is the soil's ability to remove anions (such as nitrate, phosphate) from the soil water solution and sequester those for later exchange as the plant roots release carbonate anions to the soil water solution. Those colloids which have low CEC tend to have some AEC. Amorphous and sesquioxide clays have the highest AEC, followed by the iron oxides. Levels of AEC are much lower than for CEC, because of the generally higher rate of positively (versus negatively) charged surfaces on soil colloids, to the exception of variable-charge soils. Phosphates tend to be held at anion exchange sites.
Iron and aluminum hydroxide clays are able to exchange their hydroxide anions (OH−) for other anions. The order reflecting the strength of anion adhesion is as follows:
H2PO−4 replaces SO2−4 replaces NO−3 replaces Cl−
The amount of exchangeable anions is of a magnitude of tenths to a few milliequivalents per 100 g dry soil. As pH rises, there are relatively more hydroxyls, which will displace anions from the colloids and force them into solution and out of storage; hence AEC decreases with increasing pH (alkalinity).
=== Reactivity (pH) ===
Soil reactivity is expressed in terms of pH and is a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of the soil. More precisely, it is a measure of hydronium concentration in an aqueous solution and ranges in values from 0 to 14 (acidic to basic) but practically speaking for soils, pH ranges from 3.5 to 9.5, as pH values beyond those extremes are toxic to life forms.
At 25 °C an aqueous solution that has a pH of 3.5 has 10−3.5 moles H3O+ (hydronium ions) per litre of solution (and also 10−10.5 moles per litre OH−). A pH of 7, defined as neutral, has 10−7 moles of hydronium ions per litre of solution and also 10−7 moles of OH− per litre; since the two concentrations are equal, they are said to neutralise each other. A pH of 9.5 has 10−9.5 moles hydronium ions per litre of solution (and also 10−2.5 moles per litre OH−). A pH of 3.5 has one million times more hydronium ions per litre than a solution with pH of 9.5 (9.5 − 3.5 = 6 or 106) and is thus more acidic.
The effect of pH on a soil is to remove from the soil or to make available certain ions. Soils with high acidity tend to have toxic amounts of aluminium and manganese. As a result of a trade-off between toxicity and requirement most nutrients are better available to plants at moderate pH, although most minerals are more soluble (weatherable) in acid soils. Soil organisms are hindered by high acidity, and most agricultural crops do best with mineral soils of pH 6.5 and organic soils of pH 5.5. Given that at low pH toxic metals (e.g. aluminium, cadmium, zinc, lead) are positively charged as cations and organic pollutants are in non-ionic form, thus both are made more available to organisms, it has been suggested that plants, animals and microbes commonly living in acid soils are pre-adapted to every kind of pollution, whether of natural or human origin.
In high rainfall areas, soils tend to acidify as the basic cations are forced off the soil colloids by the mass action of hydronium ions from usual or unusual rain acidity against those attached to the colloids. High rainfall rates can then wash the nutrients out, leaving the soil inhabited only by those organisms which are particularly efficient to uptake nutrients in very acid conditions, like in tropical rainforests. Once the colloids are saturated with H3O+, the addition of any more hydronium ions or aluminum hydroxyl cations drives the pH even lower (more acidic) as the soil has been left with no buffering capacity. In areas of extreme rainfall and high temperatures, clay and humus may be washed out, further reducing the buffering capacity of the soil. In low rainfall areas, unleached calcium pushes pH to 8.5 and with the addition of exchangeable sodium, soils may reach pH 10. Beyond a pH of 9, plant growth is reduced. High pH results in low micro-nutrient mobility, but water-soluble chelates of those nutrients can correct the deficit. Sodium can be reduced by the addition of gypsum (calcium sulphate) as calcium adheres to clay more tightly than does sodium causing sodium to be pushed into the soil water solution where it can be washed out by an abundance of water.
==== Base saturation percentage ====
There are acid-forming cations (e.g. hydronium, aluminium, iron) and there are base-forming cations (e.g. calcium, magnesium, sodium). The fraction of the negatively-charged soil colloid exchange sites (CEC) that are occupied by base-forming cations is called base saturation. If a soil has a CEC of 20 meq and 5 meq are aluminium and hydronium cations (acid-forming), the remainder of positions on the colloids (20 − 5 = 15 meq) are assumed occupied by base-forming cations, so that the base saturation is 15 ÷ 20 × 100% = 75% (the compliment 25% is assumed acid-forming cations). Base saturation is almost in direct proportion to pH (it increases with increasing pH). It is of use in calculating the amount of lime needed to neutralise an acid soil (lime requirement). The amount of lime needed to neutralize a soil must take account of the amount of acid forming ions on the colloids (exchangeable acidity), not just those in the soil water solution (free acidity). The addition of enough lime to neutralize the soil water solution will be insufficient to change the pH, as the acid forming cations stored on the soil colloids will tend to restore the original pH condition as they are pushed off those colloids by the calcium of the added lime.
==== Buffering ====
The resistance of soil to change in pH, as a result of the addition of acid or basic material, is a measure of the buffering capacity of a soil and (for a particular soil type) increases as the CEC increases. Hence, pure sand has almost no buffering ability, though soils high in colloids (whether mineral or organic) have high buffering capacity. Buffering occurs by cation exchange and neutralisation. However, colloids are not the only regulators of soil pH. The role of carbonates should be underlined, too. More generally, according to pH levels, several buffer systems take precedence over each other, from calcium carbonate buffer range to iron buffer range.
=== Redox ===
Soil chemical reactions involve some combination of proton and electron transfer. Oxidation occurs if there is a loss of electrons in the transfer process while reduction occurs if there is a gain of electrons. Reduction potential is measured in volts or millivolts. Soil microbial communities develop along electron transport chains, forming electrically conductive biofilms, and developing networks of bacterial nanowires.
Redox factors act on soil development, with redoximorphic color features providing critical information for soil interpretation. Understanding the redox gradient is important to managing carbon sequestration, bioremediation, wetland delineation, and soil-based microbial fuel cells.
== Nutrients ==
Seventeen elements or nutrients are essential for plant growth and reproduction. They are carbon (C), hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), sulfur (S), calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), iron (Fe), boron (B), manganese (Mn), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni) and chlorine (Cl). Nutrients required for plants to complete their life cycle are considered essential nutrients. Nutrients that enhance the growth of plants but are not necessary to complete the plant's life cycle are considered non-essential. Except for carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, which are supplied by carbon dioxide and water, and nitrogen, provided through nitrogen fixation, the nutrients derive originally from the mineral component of the soil. The law of the minimum expresses that when the available form of a nutrient is not in enough proportion in the soil solution, other nutrients cannot be taken up at an optimum rate by a plant. A particular nutrient ratio (stoichiometry) of the soil solution is thus mandatory for optimizing plant growth, a value which might differ from nutrient ratios calculated from plant composition.
Plant uptake of nutrients can only proceed when present in a plant-available form. In most situations, nutrients are absorbed in an ionic form from (or together with) soil water. Although minerals are the origin of most nutrients, and the bulk of most nutrient elements in the soil is held in crystalline form within primary and secondary minerals, they weather too slowly to support rapid plant growth. For example, the application of finely ground minerals, feldspar and apatite, to soil seldom provides the necessary amounts of potassium and phosphorus at a rate sufficient for good plant growth, as most of the nutrients remain bound in the crystals of those minerals. However, plants are able to stimulate mineral weathering, and thus the availability of mineral-bound nutrients, through various processes, both direct (e.g. weathering agents such as carbon dioxide, organic acids and ligands) and indirect (e.g. mycorrhizal fungi, rhizosphere bacteria).
The nutrients adsorbed onto the surfaces of clay colloids and soil organic matter provide a more accessible reservoir of many plant nutrients (e.g., K, Ca, Mg, P, Zn). As plants absorb the nutrients from the soil water, the soluble pool is replenished from the surface-bound pool. The decomposition of soil organic matter by microorganisms is another mechanism whereby the soluble pool of nutrients is replenished – this is important for the supply of plant-available N, S, P, and B from soil.
Gram for gram, the capacity of humus to hold nutrients and water is far greater than that of clay minerals, most of the soil cation exchange capacity arising from charged carboxylic groups on organic matter. However, despite the remarkable capacity of humus to retain water once water-soaked, its high hydrophobicity decreases its wettability once dry, a non-reversible process called hysteresis. Small amounts of humus may remarkably increase the soil's capacity to promote plant growth.
== Soil organic matter ==
The organic material in soil is made up of organic compounds and includes plant, animal and microbial material, both living and dead. A typical soil has a biomass composition of 70% microorganisms, 22% macrofauna, and 8% roots. The living component of an acre of soil may include 900 lb of earthworms, 2400 lb of fungi, 1500 lb of bacteria, 133 lb of protozoa and 890 lb of arthropods and algae.
A few percent of the soil organic matter, with small residence time, consists of the microbial biomass and metabolites of bacteria, molds, and actinomycetes that work to break down the dead organic matter. Were it not for the mineralizing action of these microorganisms, the entire carbon dioxide part of the atmosphere would be sequestered as organic matter in the soil. However, in the same time soil microbes contribute to carbon sequestration in the topsoil through the formation of stable humus. In the aim to sequester more carbon in the soil for alleviating the greenhouse effect it would be more efficient in the long-term to stimulate humification than to decrease litter decomposition.
The main part of soil organic matter is a complex assemblage of small organic molecules, collectively called humus or humic substances. The use of these terms, which do not rely on a clear chemical classification, has been considered as obsolete. Other studies showed that the classical notion of molecule is not convenient for humus, which escaped most attempts done over two centuries to resolve it in unit components, but still is chemically distinct from polysaccharides, lignins and proteins.
Most living things in soils, including plants, animals, bacteria, and fungi, transform nutrients and energy in organic matter and in turn are dependent on it for their requirements. Soils have organic compounds in varying degrees of decomposition, the rate of which is dependent on temperature, soil moisture, and aeration. Bacteria and fungi feed on raw organic matter, which are fed upon by protozoa, which in turn are fed upon by nematodes, annelids and arthropods, themselves able to consume and transform raw or humified organic matter. This has been called the soil food web, through which all organic matter is processed as in a digestive system. Organic matter holds soils open, allowing the infiltration of air and water, and may hold as much as twice its weight in water. Many soils, including desert and rocky-gravel soils, have little or no organic matter. Soils that are all organic matter, such as peat (histosols), are infertile. In its earliest stage of decomposition, the original organic material is often called raw or fresh organic matter. The final stage of decomposition is called humus.
In grassland, much of the organic matter added to the soil is from the deep, fibrous, grass root systems. By contrast, tree leaves falling on the forest floor are the principal source of soil organic matter in the forest. Another difference is the frequent occurrence in the grasslands of fires that destroy large amounts of aboveground material but stimulate even greater contributions from roots. Also, the much greater acidity under any forests inhibits the action of certain soil organisms that otherwise would mix much of the surface litter into the mineral soil. As a result, the soils under grasslands generally develop a thicker A horizon with a deeper distribution of organic matter than in comparable soils under forests, which characteristically store most of their organic matter in the forest floor (O horizon) and thin A horizon.
== Horizons ==
A horizontal layer of the soil, whose physical features, composition and age are distinct from those above and beneath, is referred to as a soil horizon. The naming of a horizon is based on the type of material of which it is composed. Those materials reflect the duration of specific processes of soil formation. They are labelled using a shorthand notation of letters and numbers which describe the horizon in terms of its colour, size, texture, structure, consistency, root quantity, pH, voids, boundary characteristics and presence of nodules or concretions. No soil profile has all the major horizons. Some, called entisols, may have only one horizon or are currently considered as having no horizon, in particular incipient soils from unreclaimed mining waste deposits, moraines, volcanic cones sand dunes or alluvial terraces. Upper soil horizons may be lacking in truncated soils following wind or water ablation, with concomitant downslope burying of soil horizons, a natural process aggravated by agricultural practices such as tillage. The growth of trees is another source of disturbance, creating a micro-scale heterogeneity which is still visible in soil horizons once trees have died. By passing from a horizon to another, from the top to the bottom of the soil profile, one goes back in time, with past events registered in soil horizons like in sediment layers. Sampling pollen, testate amoebae and plant remains in soil horizons may help to reveal environmental changes (e.g. climate change, land use change) which occurred in the course of soil formation. Soil horizons can be dated by several methods such as radiocarbon, using pieces of charcoal provided they are of enough size to escape pedoturbation by earthworm activity and other mechanical disturbances. Fossil soil horizons from paleosols can be found within sedimentary rock sequences, allowing the study of past environments.
The exposure of parent material to favourable conditions produces mineral soils that are marginally suitable for plant growth, as is the case in eroded soils. The growth of vegetation results in the production of organic residues which fall on the ground as litter for plant aerial parts (leaf litter) or are directly produced belowground for subterranean plant organs (root litter), and then release dissolved organic matter. The remaining surficial organic layer, called the O horizon, produces a more active soil due to the effect of the organisms that live within it. Organisms colonise and break down organic materials, making available nutrients upon which other plants and animals can live. After sufficient time, humus moves downward (leaching, eluviation) and is deposited (illuviation) in a distinctive organic-mineral surface layer called the A horizon, in which organic matter is mixed with mineral matter through the activity of burrowing animals, a process called bioturbation. This natural process does not go to completion in the presence of conditions detrimental to soil life such as strong acidity, cold climate or pollution, stemming in the accumulation of undecomposed organic matter within a single organic horizon overlying the mineral soil and in the juxtaposition of humified organic matter and mineral particles, without intimate mixing, in the underlying mineral horizons.
== Classification ==
One of the first soil classification systems was developed by the Russian scientist Vasily Dokuchaev around 1880. It was modified a number of times by American and European researchers and was developed into the system commonly used until the 1960s. It was based on the idea that soils have a particular morphology based on the materials and factors that form them. In the 1960s, a different classification system began to emerge which focused on soil morphology instead of parental materials and soil-forming factors. Since then, it has undergone further modifications. The World Reference Base for Soil Resources aims to establish an international reference base for soil classification.
In the United States, the system of Soil Taxonomy is used. This system was established by the United States Department of Agriculture: Natural Resource Conversation Service and is currently on its second edition, released in 1999 by the Soil Survey Staff.
== Uses ==
Soil is used in agriculture, where it serves as the anchor and primary nutrient base for plants. The types of soil and available moisture determine the species of plants that can be cultivated. Agricultural soil science was the primeval domain of soil knowledge, long time before the advent of pedology in the 19th century. However, as demonstrated by aeroponics, aquaponics and hydroponics, soil material is not an absolute essential for agriculture, and soilless cropping systems have been claimed as the future of agriculture for an endless growing mankind.
Soil material is also a critical component in mining, construction and landscape development (also called landscape architecture) industries. Soil serves as a foundation for most construction projects. The movement of massive volumes of soil can be involved in surface mining, road building and dam construction. Earth sheltering is the architectural practice of using soil for external thermal mass against building walls. Many building materials are soil based. Loss of soil through urbanization is growing at a high rate in many areas and can be critical for the maintenance of subsistence agriculture.
Soil resources are critical to the environment, as well as to food and fibre production, producing 98.8% of food consumed by humans. Soil provides minerals and water to plants according to several processes involved in plant nutrition. Soil absorbs rainwater and releases it later, thus preventing floods and drought, flood regulation being one of the major ecosystem services provided by soil. Soil cleans water as it percolates through it.
Soil is the main or the sole habitat for many soil organisms: the major part of known and unknown biodiversity is in the soil, in the form of earthworms, woodlice, millipedes, centipedes, snails, slugs, mites, springtails, enchytraeids, nematodes, protists, bacteria, archaea, fungi and algae; and most organisms living above ground have part of them (plants) or spend part of their life cycle (e.g. insects) below-ground. Above-ground and below-ground biodiversities are tightly interconnected, making soil protection of paramount importance for any restoration or conservation plan.
The biological component of soil is an extremely important carbon sink since about 57% of the biotic content is carbon. Even in deserts, cyanobacteria, lichens and mosses form biological soil crusts which capture and sequester a significant amount of carbon by photosynthesis. Intensive farming and grazing methods have degraded soils and released much of this sequestered carbon to the atmosphere. Restoring the world's soils could offset the effect of increases in greenhouse gas emissions and global warming, while improving crop yields and reducing water needs.
Waste management often has a soil component. Septic drain fields treat septic tank effluent using aerobic soil processes. Land application of waste water relies on soil biology to aerobically treat BOD. Alternatively, landfills use soil for daily cover, isolating waste deposits from the atmosphere and preventing unpleasant smells. Composting is now widely used to treat aerobically solid domestic waste and dried effluents of settling basins. Although compost is not soil, biological processes taking place during composting are similar to those occurring during decomposition and humification of soil organic matter.
Organic soils, especially peat, serve as a significant fuel and horticultural resource. Peat soils are also commonly used for the sake of agriculture in Nordic countries, because peatland sites, when drained, provide fertile soils for food production. However, wide areas of peat production, such as rain-fed sphagnum bogs, also called mires, blanket bogs or raised bogs, are now threatened and protected because of their high patrimonial interest. As an example, Flow Country, covering 4,000 square kilometres of rolling expanse of blanket bogs in Scotland, is now recognized as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Under present-day global warming peat soils are thought to be involved in a self-reinforcing (positive feedback) process of increased emission of greenhouse gases (methane and carbon dioxide) and increased temperature, a contention which is still under debate when replaced at field scale and including stimulated plant growth.
Geophagy is the practice of eating soil-like substances. Both animals and humans occasionally consume soil for medicinal, recreational, or religious purposes. It has been shown that some monkeys consume soil, together with their preferred food (tree foliage and fruits), in order to alleviate tannin toxicity.
Soils filter and purify water and affect its chemistry. Rain water and pooled water from ponds, lakes and rivers percolate through the soil horizons and the upper rock strata, thus becoming groundwater. Pests (viruses) and pollutants, such as persistent organic pollutants (chlorinated pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls), oils (hydrocarbons), heavy metals (lead, zinc, cadmium), and excess nutrients (nitrates, sulfates, phosphates) are filtered out by the soil. Soil organisms metabolise or immobilise pollutants in their biomass and necromass (dead biomass), thereby incorporating them into stable humus. The physical integrity of soil is also a prerequisite for avoiding landslides in rugged landscapes.
== Degradation ==
Land degradation is a human-induced or natural process which impairs the capacity of land to function. Soil degradation involves acidification, contamination, desertification, erosion or salination.
=== Acidification ===
Soil acidification is beneficial in the case of alkaline soils, but it degrades land when it lowers crop productivity, soil biological activity and increases soil vulnerability to contamination and erosion. Soils are initially acid and remain such when their parent materials are low in basic cations (calcium, magnesium, potassium and sodium). On parent materials richer in weatherable minerals acidification occurs when basic cations are leached from the soil profile by rainfall or exported by the harvesting of forest or agricultural crops. Soil acidification is accelerated by the use of acid-forming nitrogenous fertilizers and by the effects of acid precipitation. Deforestation is another cause of soil acidification, mediated by increased leaching of soil nutrients in the absence of tree canopies.
=== Contamination ===
Soil contamination at low levels is often within a soil's capacity to treat and assimilate waste material. Soil biota can treat waste by transforming it, mainly through microbial enzymatic activity. Soil organic matter and soil clay minerals can adsorb the waste material and decrease its toxicity, although when in colloidal form they may transport the adsorbed contaminants to subsurface environments. Many waste treatment processes rely on this natural bioremediation capacity. Exceeding treatment capacity can damage soil biota and limit soil function. Derelict soils occur where industrial contamination or other development activity damages the soil to such a degree that the land cannot be used safely or productively, although some ecosystem services (e.g. decomposition) could still be provided by some derelict soils. Remediation of derelict soil uses principles of geology, physics, chemistry and biology to degrade, attenuate, isolate or remove soil contaminants to restore soil functions and values. Techniques include leaching, air sparging, soil conditioners, phytoremediation, bioremediation and Monitored Natural Attenuation. An example of diffuse pollution with contaminants is copper accumulation in vineyards and orchards to which fungicides are repeatedly applied, even in organic farming.
Microfibres from synthetic textiles are another type of plastic soil contamination. 100% of agricultural soil samples from southwestern China contain plastic particles, 92% of which are microfibres. Sources of microfibres likely include string or twine, as well as irrigation water in which clothes have been washed.
The application of biosolids from sewage sludge and compost can introduce microplastics to soils. This adds to the burden of microplastics from other sources (e.g. the atmosphere). Approximately half the sewage sludge in Europe and North America is applied to agricultural land. In Europe it has been estimated that for every million inhabitants 113 to 770 tonnes of microplastics are added to agricultural soils each year.
=== Desertification ===
Desertification, an environmental process of ecosystem degradation in arid and semi-arid regions, is often caused by badly adapted human activities such as overgrazing or excess harvesting of firewood. It is a common misconception that drought causes desertification. While droughts are common in arid and semiarid lands, well-managed lands can recover from drought when the rains return. Soil management tools include maintaining soil nutrient and organic matter levels, reduced tillage and increased plant cover. These practices help to control erosion and maintain productivity during periods when moisture is available. Continued land abuse during droughts, however, increases land degradation. Increased population and livestock pressure on marginal lands accelerates desertification. It is now questioned whether present-day climate warming will favour or disfavour desertification, with contradictory reports about predicted rainfall trends associated with increased temperature, and strong discrepancies among regions, even in the same country.
=== Erosion ===
Erosion of soil is caused by water, wind, ice, and movement in response to gravity. More than one kind of erosion can occur simultaneously. Erosion is distinguished from weathering, since erosion also transports eroded soil away from its place of origin (soil in transit may be described as sediment). Erosion is an intrinsic natural process, but in many places it is greatly increased by human activity, especially unsuitable land use practices. These include agricultural activities which leave the soil bare during times of heavy rain or strong winds, overgrazing, deforestation, and improper construction activity. Improved management can limit erosion. Soil conservation techniques which are employed include changes of land use (such as replacing erosion-prone crops with grass or other soil-binding plants), changes to the timing or type of agricultural operations, terrace building, use of erosion-suppressing cover materials (including cover crops and other plants), limiting disturbance during construction, and avoiding construction during erosion-prone periods and in erosion-prone places such as steep slopes. Historically, one of the best examples of large-scale soil erosion due to unsuitable land-use practices is wind erosion (the so-called dust bowl) which ruined American and Canadian prairies during the 1930s, when immigrant farmers, encouraged by the federal government of both countries, settled and converted the original shortgrass prairie to agricultural crops and cattle ranching.
A serious and long-running water erosion problem occurs in China, on the middle reaches of the Yellow River and the upper reaches of the Yangtze River. From the Yellow River, over 1.6 billion tons of sediment flow each year into the ocean. The sediment originates primarily from water erosion (gully erosion) in the Loess Plateau region of northwest China.
Soil piping is a particular form of soil erosion that occurs below the soil surface. It causes levee and dam failure, as well as sink hole formation. Turbulent flow removes soil starting at the mouth of the seep flow and the subsoil erosion advances up-gradient. The term sand boil is used to describe the appearance of the discharging end of an active soil pipe.
=== Salination ===
Soil salination is the accumulation of free salts to such an extent that it leads to degradation of the agricultural value of soils and vegetation. Consequences include corrosion damage, reduced plant growth, erosion due to loss of plant cover and soil structure, and water quality problems due to sedimentation. Salination occurs due to a combination of natural and human-caused processes. Arid conditions favour salt accumulation. This is especially apparent when soil parent material is saline. Irrigation of arid lands is especially problematic. All irrigation water has some level of salinity. Irrigation, especially when it involves leakage from canals and overirrigation in the field, often raises the underlying water table. Rapid salination occurs when the land surface is within the capillary fringe of saline groundwater. Soil salinity control involves watertable control and flushing with higher levels of applied water in combination with tile drainage or another form of subsurface drainage.
== Reclamation ==
Soils which contain high levels of particular clays with high swelling properties, such as smectites, are often very fertile. For example, the smectite-rich paddy soils of Thailand's Central Plains are among the most productive in the world. However, the overuse of mineral nitrogen fertilizers and pesticides in irrigated intensive rice production has endangered these soils, forcing farmers to implement integrated practices based on Cost Reduction Operating Principles.
Many farmers in tropical areas, however, struggle to retain organic matter and clay in the soils they work. For example, productivity has declined and soil erosion has increased in the low-clay soils of northern Thailand, following the abandonment of shifting cultivation for a more permanent land use. Farmers initially responded by adding organic matter and clay from termite mound material, but this was unsustainable in the long-term because of rarefaction of termite mounds. Scientists experimented with adding bentonite, one of the smectite family of clays, to the soil. In field trials, conducted by scientists from the International Water Management Institute (IWMI) in cooperation with Khon Kaen University and local farmers, this had the effect of helping retain water and nutrients. Supplementing the farmer's usual practice with a single application of 200 kilograms per rai (1,300 kg/ha; 1,100 lb/acre) of bentonite resulted in an average yield increase of 73%. Other studies showed that applying bentonite to degraded sandy soils reduced the risk of crop failure during drought years.
In 2008, three years after the initial trials, IWMI scientists conducted a survey among 250 farmers in northeast Thailand, half of whom had applied bentonite to their fields. The average improvement for those using the clay addition was 18% higher than for non-clay users. Using the clay had enabled some farmers to switch to growing vegetables, which need more fertile soil. This helped to increase their income. The researchers estimated that 200 farmers in northeast Thailand and 400 in Cambodia had adopted the use of clays, and that a further 20,000 farmers were introduced to the new technique.
If the soil is too high in clay or salts (e.g. saline sodic soil), adding gypsum, washed river sand and organic matter (e.g.municipal solid waste) will balance the composition.
Adding organic matter, like ramial chipped wood or compost, to soil which is depleted in nutrients and too high in sand will boost its quality and improve production.
Special mention must be made of the use of charcoal, and more generally biochar to improve nutrient-poor tropical soils, a process based on the higher fertility of anthropogenic pre-Columbian Amazonian Dark Earths, also called Terra Preta de Índio, due to interesting physical and chemical properties of soil black carbon as a source of stable humus. However, the uncontrolled application of charred waste products of all kinds may endanger soil life and human health.
== History of studies and research ==
The history of the study of soil is intimately tied to humans' urgent need to provide food for themselves and forage for their animals. Throughout history, civilizations have prospered or declined as a function of the availability and productivity of their soils.
=== Studies of soil fertility ===
The Greek historian Xenophon (450–355 BCE) was the first to expound upon the merits of green-manuring crops: 'But then whatever weeds are upon the ground, being turned into earth, enrich the soil as much as dung.'
Columella's Of husbandry, c. 60 CE, advocated the use of lime and that clover and alfalfa (green manure) should be turned under, and was used by 15 generations (450 years) under the Roman Empire until its collapse. From the fall of Rome to the French Revolution, knowledge of soil and agriculture was passed on from parent to child and as a result, crop yields were low. During the European Middle Ages, Yahya Ibn al-'Awwam's handbook, with its emphasis on irrigation, guided the people of North Africa, Spain and the Middle East; a translation of this work was finally carried to the southwest of the United States when under Spanish influence. Olivier de Serres, considered the father of French agronomy, was the first to suggest the abandonment of fallowing and its replacement by hay meadows within crop rotations. He also highlighted the importance of soil (the French terroir) in the management of vineyards. His famous book Le Théâtre d'Agriculture et mesnage des champs contributed to the rise of modern, sustainable agriculture and to the collapse of old agricultural practices such as soil amendment for crops by the lifting of forest litter and assarting, which ruined the soils of western Europe during the Middle Ages and even later on according to regions.
Experiments into what made plants grow first led to the idea that the ash left behind when plant matter was burned was the essential element, but the role of nitrogen was overlooked, which is not left on the ground after combustion, a belief which prevailed until the 19th century. In about 1635, the Flemish chemist Jan Baptist van Helmont thought he had proved water to be the essential element from his famous five years' experiment with a willow tree grown with only the addition of rainwater. His conclusion came from the fact that the increase in the plant's weight had apparently been produced only by the addition of water, with no reduction in the soil's weight. John Woodward (d. 1728) experimented with various types of water ranging from clean to muddy and found muddy water the best, and so he concluded that earthy matter was the essential element. Others concluded it was humus in the soil that passed some essence to the growing plant. Still others held that the vital growth principal was something passed from dead plants or animals to the new plants. At the start of the 18th century, Jethro Tull demonstrated that it was beneficial to cultivate (stir) the soil, but his opinion that the stirring made the fine parts of soil available for plant absorption was erroneous.
As chemistry developed, it was applied to the investigation of soil fertility. The French chemist Antoine Lavoisier showed in about 1778 that plants and animals must combust oxygen internally to live. He was able to deduce that most of the 165-pound (75 kg) weight of Van Helmont's willow tree derived from air. It was the French agriculturalist Jean-Baptiste Boussingault who by means of experimentation obtained evidence showing that the main sources of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen for plants were air and water, while nitrogen was taken from soil. Justus von Liebig in his book Organic chemistry in its applications to agriculture and physiology (published 1840), asserted that the chemicals in plants must have come from the soil and air and that to maintain soil fertility, the used minerals must be replaced. Liebig nevertheless believed the nitrogen was supplied from the air. The enrichment of soil with guano by the Incas was rediscovered in 1802, by Alexander von Humboldt. This led to guano mining and that of Chilean nitrate and to its application to soil in the United States and Europe after 1840.
The work of Liebig was a revolution for agriculture, and so other investigators started experimentation based on it. In England John Bennet Lawes and Joseph Henry Gilbert worked in the Rothamsted Experimental Station, founded by the former, and (re)discovered that plants took nitrogen from the soil, and that salts needed to be in an available state to be absorbed by plants. Their investigations also produced the superphosphate, consisting in the acid treatment of phosphate rock. This led to the invention and use of salts of potassium (K) and nitrogen (N) as fertilizers. Ammonia generated by the production of coke was recovered and used as fertiliser. Finally, the chemical basis of nutrients delivered to the soil in manure was understood and in the mid-19th century chemical fertilisers were applied. However, the dynamic interaction of soil and its life forms was still not understood.
In 1856, J. Thomas Way discovered that ammonia contained in fertilisers was transformed into nitrate, and twenty years later Robert Warington proved that this transformation was done by living organisms. In 1890 Sergei Winogradsky announced he had found the bacteria responsible for this transformation.
It was known that certain legumes could take up nitrogen from the air and fix it to the soil but it took the development of bacteriology towards the end of the 19th century to lead to an understanding of the role played in nitrogen fixation by bacteria. The symbiosis of bacteria and leguminous roots, and the fixation of nitrogen by the bacteria, were simultaneously discovered by the German agronomist Hermann Hellriegel and the Dutch microbiologist Martinus Beijerinck.
Crop rotation, mechanisation, chemical and natural fertilisers led to a doubling of wheat yields in western Europe between 1800 and 1900.
=== Studies of soil formation ===
Scientists who studied soil in connection with agricultural practices considered it mainly a static substrate. However, the soil is the result of evolution from more ancient geological materials under the action of biotic and abiotic processes. After studies of soil improvement commenced, other researchers began to study soil genesis and, as a result, soil types and classifications.
In 1860, while in Mississippi, Eugene W. Hilgard (1833–1916) studied the relationship between rock material, climate, vegetation, and the type of soils that were developed. He realised that the soils were dynamic and considered the classification of soil types. His work was discontinued. At about the same time, Friedrich Albert Fallou described soil profiles and related soil characteristics to their formation as part of his professional work evaluating forest and farmland for the principality of Saxony. His 1857 book, Anfangsgründe der Bodenkunde (First principles of soil science), established modern soil science. Contemporary with Fallou's work, and driven by the same need to accurately assess land for equitable taxation, Vasily Dokuchaev led a team of soil scientists in Russia who conducted an extensive survey of soils, observing that similar basic rocks, climate and vegetation types lead to similar soil layering and types, and established the concepts for soil classifications. Due to language barriers, the work of this team was not communicated to Western Europe until 1914 through a publication in German by Konstantin Glinka, a member of the Russian team.
Curtis F. Marbut, influenced by the work of the Russian team, translated Glinka's publication into English, and, as he was placed in charge of the U.S. National Cooperative Soil Survey, applied it to a national soil classification system.
== See also ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
== Bibliography ==
== Further reading ==

Pesticides are substances that are used to control pests. They include herbicides, insecticides, nematicides, fungicides, and many others (see table). The most common of these are herbicides, which account for approximately 50% of all pesticide use globally. Most pesticides are used as plant protection products (also known as crop protection products), which in general protect plants from weeds, fungi, or insects.
In general, a pesticide is a chemical or biological agent (such as a virus, bacterium, or fungus) that deters, incapacitates, kills, or otherwise discourages pests. Target pests can include insects, plant pathogens, weeds, molluscs, birds, mammals, fish, nematodes (roundworms), and microbes that destroy property, cause nuisance, spread disease, or are disease vectors. Pesticides thus increase agricultural yields. Along with these benefits, pesticides also have drawbacks, such as potential toxicity to humans and other species.
== Definition ==
The word pesticide derives from the Latin pestis (plague) and caedere (kill).
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) has defined pesticide as:
any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, or controlling any pest, including vectors of human or animal disease, unwanted species of plants or animals, causing harm during or otherwise interfering with the production, processing, storage, transport, or marketing of food, agricultural commodities, wood and wood products or animal feedstuffs, or substances that may be administered to animals for the control of insects, arachnids, or other pests in or on their bodies. The term includes substances intended for use as a plant growth regulator, defoliant, desiccant, or agent for thinning fruit or preventing the premature fall of fruit. Also used as substances applied to crops either before or after harvest to protect the commodity from deterioration during storage and transport.
=== Classifications ===
Pesticides can be classified by target organism (e.g., herbicides, insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, and pediculicides – see table),
Biopesticides according to the EPA include microbial pesticides, biochemical pesticides, and plant-incorporated protectants.
Pesticides can be classified into structural classes, with many structural classes developed for each of the target organisms listed in the table. A structural class is usually associated with a single mode of action, whereas a mode of action may encompass more than one structural class.
The pesticidal chemical (active ingredient) is mixed (formulated) with other components to form the product that is sold, and which is applied in various ways. Pesticides in gas form are fumigants.
Pesticides can be classified based upon their mode of action, which indicates the exact biological mechanism which the pesticide disrupts. The modes of action are important for resistance management, and are categorized and administered by the insecticide, herbicide, and fungicide resistance action committees.
Pesticides may be systemic or non-systemic. A systemic pesticide moves (translocates) inside the plant. Translocation may be upward in the xylem, or downward in the phloem or both. Non-systemic pesticides (contact pesticides) remain on the surface and act through direct contact with the target organism. Pesticides are more effective if they are systemic. Systemicity is a prerequisite for the pesticide to be used as a seed-treatment.
Pesticides can be classified as persistent (non-biodegradable) or non-persistent (biodegradable). A pesticide must be persistent enough to kill or control its target but must degrade fast enough not to accumulate in the environment or the food chain in order to be approved by the authorities. Persistent pesticides, including DDT, were banned many years ago, an exception being spraying in houses to combat malaria vectors.
== History ==
From ancient times until the 1950s the pesticides used were inorganic compounds and plant extracts. The inorganic compounds were derivatives of copper, arsenic, mercury, sulfur, among others, and the plant extracts contained pyrethrum, nicotine, and rotenone among others. The less toxic of these are still in use in organic farming. In the 1940s the insecticide DDT, and the herbicide 2,4-D, were introduced. These synthetic organic compounds were widely used and were very profitable. They were followed in the 1950s and 1960s by numerous other synthetic pesticides, which led to the growth of the pesticide industry. During this period, it became increasingly evident that DDT, which had been sprayed widely in the environment to combat the vector, had accumulated in the food chain. It had become a global pollutant, as summarized in the well-known book Silent Spring. Finally, DDT was banned in the 1970s in several countries, and subsequently all persistent pesticides were banned worldwide, an exception being spraying on interior walls for vector control.
Resistance to a pesticide was first seen in the 1920s with inorganic pesticides, and later it was found that development of resistance is to be expected, and measures to delay it are important. Integrated pest management (IPM) was introduced in the 1950s. By careful analysis and spraying only when an economical or biological threshold of crop damage is reached, pesticide application is reduced. This became in the 2020s the official policy of international organisations, industry, and many governments. With the introduction of high yielding varieties in the 1960s in the green revolution, more pesticides were used. Since the 1980s genetically modified crops were introduced, which resulted in lower amounts of insecticides used on them. Organic agriculture, which uses only non-synthetic pesticides, has grown and in 2020 represents about 1.5 per cent of the world's total agricultural land.
Pesticides have become more effective. Application rates fell from 1,000 to 2,500 grams of active ingredient per hectare (g/ha) in the 1950s to 40–100 g/ha in the 2000s. Despite this, amounts used have increased. In high income countries over 20 years between the 1990s and 2010s amounts used increased 20%, while in the low income countries amounts increased 1623%.
== Development of new pesticides ==
The aim is to find new compounds or agents with improved properties such as a new mode of action or lower application rate. Another aim is to replace older pesticides which have been banned for reasons of toxicity or environmental harm or have become less effective due to development of resistance.
The process starts with testing (screening) against target organisms such as insects, fungi or plants. Inputs are typically random compounds, natural products, compounds designed to disrupt a biochemical target, compounds described in patents or literature, or biocontrol organisms.
Compounds that are active in the screening process, known as hits or leads, cannot be used as pesticides, except for biocontrol organisms and some potent natural products. These lead compounds need to be optimised by a series of cycles of synthesis and testing of analogs. For approval by regulatory authorities for use as pesticides, the optimized compounds must meet several requirements. In addition to being potent (low application rate), they must show low toxicity to non-target organisms, low environmental impact, and viable manufacturing cost. The cost of developing a pesticide in 2024 was estimated to be 301 million US dollars. It has become more difficult to find new pesticides. More than 100 new active ingredients were introduced in the 2000s and less than 40 in the 2010s. Biopesticides are cheaper to develop, since the authorities require less toxicological and environmental study. Since 2000 the rate of new biological product introduction has frequently exceeded that of conventional products.
More than 25% of existing chemical pesticides contain one or more chiral centres (stereogenic centres). Newer pesticides with lower application rates tend to have more complex structures, and thus more often contain chiral centres. In cases when most or all of the pesticidal activity in a new compound is found in one enantiomer (the eutomer), the registration and use of the compound as this single enantiomer is preferred. This reduces the total application rate and avoids the tedious environmental testing required when registering a racemate. However, if a viable enantioselective manufacturing route cannot be found, then the racemate is registered and used.
== Uses ==
In addition to their main use in agriculture, pesticides have a number of other applications. Pesticides are used to control organisms that are considered to be harmful, or pernicious to their surroundings. For example, they are used to kill mosquitoes that can transmit potentially deadly diseases like West Nile virus, yellow fever, and malaria. They can also kill bees, wasps or ants that can cause allergic reactions. Insecticides can protect animals from illnesses that can be caused by parasites such as fleas. Pesticides can prevent sickness in humans that could be caused by moldy food or diseased produce. Herbicides can be used to clear roadside weeds, trees, and brush. They can also kill invasive weeds that may cause environmental damage. Herbicides are commonly applied in ponds and lakes to control algae and plants such as water grasses that can interfere with activities like swimming and fishing and cause the water to look or smell unpleasant. Uncontrolled pests such as termites and mold can damage structures such as houses. Pesticides are used in grocery stores and food storage facilities to manage rodents and insects that infest food such as grain. Pesticides are used on lawns and golf courses, partly for cosmetic reasons.
Integrated pest management, the use of multiple approaches to control pests, is becoming widespread and has been used with success in countries such as Indonesia, China, Bangladesh, the U.S., Australia, and Mexico. IPM attempts to recognize the more widespread impacts of an action on an ecosystem, so that natural balances are not upset.
Each use of a pesticide carries some associated risk. Proper pesticide use decreases these associated risks to a level deemed acceptable by pesticide regulatory agencies such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) of Canada.
DDT, sprayed on the walls of houses, is an organochlorine that has been used to fight malaria vectors (mosquitos) since the 1940s. The World Health Organization recommend this approach. It and other organochlorine pesticides have been banned in most countries worldwide because of their persistence in the environment and human toxicity. DDT has become less effective, as resistance was identified in Africa as early as 1955, and by 1972 nineteen species of mosquito worldwide were resistant to DDT.
== Amount used ==
Total pesticides use in agriculture in 2023 was 3.73 million tonnes of active ingredients (Mt), a 2% decrease compared with 2022, a 14 percent increase in a decade, and a doubling since 1990. Pesticides use per area of cropland in 2023 was 2.40 kg per hectare (kg/ha), a decrease of 2 percent compared with 2022; use per value of agricultural production was 0.88 g per international dollar (g/I$) (−4%); and use per person was 0.45 kg per capita (kg/cap) (−3%). Brazil was the world’s largest user of pesticides in 2023, with 801 kt of pesticides applications for agricultural use. This was around 86 percent higher than the United States of America (430 kt), the second largest user.
Applications per cropland area varied widely among these top pesticides users, from 13.9 kg/ha in Vietnam to 0.8 kg/ha in the Russian Federation. Insecticide use in the US has declined by more than half since 1980 (0.6%/yr), mostly due to the near phase-out of organophosphates. In corn fields, the decline was even steeper, due to the switchover to transgenic Bt corn.
== Benefits ==
Pesticides increase agricultural yields. Median yield increases range between 12% and 27% when pesticides are used, depending on the crop. Another study found that not using pesticides reduced crop yields by about 10%. A study conducted in 1999, found that a ban on pesticides in the United States may result in a rise of food prices, loss of jobs, and an increase in world hunger.
There are two levels of benefits for pesticide use, primary and secondary. Primary benefits are direct gains from the use of pesticides and secondary benefits are effects that are more long-term.
=== Biological ===
Controlling pests and plant disease vectors
Improved crop yields
Improved crop/livestock quality
Invasive species controlled
Controlling human/livestock disease vectors and nuisance organisms
Human lives saved and disease reduced. Diseases controlled include malaria, with millions of lives having been saved or enhanced with the use of DDT alone.
Animal lives saved and disease reduced
Controlling organisms that harm other human activities and structures
Drivers view unobstructed
Tree/brush/leaf hazards prevented
Wooden structures protected
=== Economics ===
In 2018 world pesticide sales were estimated to be $65 billion, of which 88% was used for agriculture. Generic accounted for 85% of sales in 2018. In one study, it was estimated that for every dollar ($1) that is spent on pesticides for crops results in up to four dollars ($4) in crops which would otherwise be lost to insects, fungi and weeds. In general, farmers benefit from having an increase in crop yield and from being able to grow a variety of crops throughout the year. Consumers of agricultural products also benefit from being able to afford the vast quantities of produce available year-round.
== Disadvantages ==
On the cost side of pesticide use there can be costs to the environment and costs to human health. Pesticides safety education and pesticide applicator regulation are designed to protect the public from pesticide misuse, but do not eliminate all misuse. Reducing the use of pesticides and choosing less toxic pesticides may reduce risks placed on society and the environment from pesticide use.
=== Health effects ===
Most health concerns related to pesticides stem from direct use, whether in occupational or non-occupational settings. In contrast, health risks from pesticide residues in fruits and vegetables are considered minimal.
Occupational use of pesticides may affect health negatively. mimicking hormones causing reproductive problems, and also causing cancer. A 2007 systematic review found that "most studies on non-Hodgkin lymphoma and leukemia showed positive associations with pesticide exposure" and thus concluded that cosmetic use of pesticides should be decreased. There is substantial evidence of associations between organophosphate insecticide exposures and neurobehavioral alterations. Limited evidence also exists for other negative outcomes from pesticide exposure including neurological, birth defects, and fetal death.
2014 epidemiological review found associations between autism and exposure to certain pesticides, but noted that the available evidence was insufficient to conclude that the relationship was causal.
Owing to inadequate regulation and safety precautions, 99% of pesticide-related deaths occur in developing countries that account for only 25% of pesticide usage.
==== Exposure to pesticide residues from eating food ====
According to the American Cancer Society there is no evidence that pesticide residues in food increase the risk of people getting cancer. A 2009 study estimated that lifetime exposure to pesticide residues from eating fruits and vegetables results in only 4.2 and 3.2 minutes of lost life per person in Switzerland and the United States, respectively.
==== Non-occupational pesticide use ====
Pesticides are also found in majority of U.S. households with 88 million out of the 121.1 million households indicating that they use some form of pesticide in 2012. As of 2007, there were more than 1,055 active ingredients registered as pesticides, which yield over 20,000 pesticide products that are marketed in the United States.
The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends limiting exposure of children to pesticides and using safer alternatives:
One study found pesticide self-poisoning the method of choice in one third of suicides worldwide, and recommended, among other things, more restrictions on the types of pesticides that are most harmful to humans.
==== Pesticide use among agricultural workers ====
The World Health Organization and the UN Environment Programme estimate that 3 million agricultural workers in the developing world experience severe poisoning from pesticides each year, resulting in 18,000 deaths. According to one study, as many as 25 million workers in developing countries may suffer mild pesticide poisoning yearly. Other occupational exposures besides agricultural workers, including pet groomers, groundskeepers, and fumigators, may also put individuals at risk of health effects from pesticides.
Pesticide use is widespread in Latin America, as around US$3 billion are spent each year in the region. Records indicate an increase in the frequency of pesticide poisonings over the past two decades. The most common incidents of pesticide poisoning is thought to result from exposure to organophosphate and carbamate insecticides. At-home pesticide use, use of unregulated products, and the role of undocumented workers within the agricultural industry makes characterizing true pesticide exposure a challenge. It is estimated that 50–80% of pesticide poisoning cases are unreported.
Underreporting of pesticide poisoning is especially common in areas where agricultural workers are less likely to seek care from a healthcare facility that may be monitoring or tracking the incidence of acute poisoning. The extent of unintentional pesticide poisoning may be much greater than available data suggest, particularly among developing countries. Globally, agriculture and food production remain one of the largest industries. In East Africa, the agricultural industry represents one of the largest sectors of the economy, with nearly 80% of its population relying on agriculture for income. Farmers in these communities rely on pesticide products to maintain high crop yields.
Some East Africa governments are shifting to corporate farming, and opportunities for foreign conglomerates to operate commercial farms have led to more accessible research on pesticide use and exposure among workers. In other areas where large proportions of the population rely on subsistence, small-scale farming, estimating pesticide use and exposure is more difficult.
==== Pesticide poisoning ====
Pesticides may exhibit toxic effects on humans and other non-target species, the severity of which depends on the frequency and magnitude of exposure. Toxicity also depends on the rate of absorption, distribution within the body, metabolism, and elimination of compounds from the body. Commonly used pesticides like organophosphates and carbamates act by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase activity, which prevents the breakdown of acetylcholine at the neural synapse. Excess acetylcholine can lead to symptoms like muscle cramps or tremors, confusion, dizziness and nausea. Studies show that farm workers in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Zimbabwe have decreased concentrations of plasma acetylcholinesterase, the enzyme responsible for breaking down acetylcholine acting on synapses throughout the nervous system. Other studies in Ethiopia have observed reduced respiratory function among farm workers who spray crops with pesticides. Numerous exposure pathways for farm workers increase the risk of pesticide poisoning, including dermal absorption walking through fields and applying products, as well as inhalation exposure.
==== Measuring exposure to pesticides ====
There are multiple approaches to measuring a person's exposure to pesticides, each of which provides an estimate of an individual's internal dose. Two broad approaches include measuring biomarkers and markers of biological effect. The former involves taking direct measurement of the parent compound or its metabolites in various types of media: urine, blood, serum. Biomarkers may include a direct measurement of the compound in the body before it's been biotransformed during metabolism. Other suitable biomarkers may include the metabolites of the parent compound after they've been biotransformed during metabolism. Toxicokinetic data can provide more detailed information on how quickly the compound is metabolized and eliminated from the body, and provide insights into the timing of exposure.
Markers of biological effect provide an estimation of exposure based on cellular activities related to the mechanism of action. For example, many studies investigating exposure to pesticides often involve the quantification of the acetylcholinesterase enzyme at the neural synapse to determine the magnitude of the inhibitory effect of organophosphate and carbamate pesticides.
Another method of quantifying exposure involves measuring, at the molecular level, the amount of pesticide interacting with the site of action. These methods are more commonly used for occupational exposures where the mechanism of action is better understood, as described by WHO guidelines published in "Biological Monitoring of Chemical Exposure in the Workplace". Better understanding of how pesticides elicit their toxic effects is needed before this method of exposure assessment can be applied to occupational exposure of agricultural workers.
Alternative methods to assess exposure include questionnaires to discern from participants whether they are experiencing symptoms associated with pesticide poisoning. Self-reported symptoms may include headaches, dizziness, nausea, joint pain, or respiratory symptoms.
===== Challenges in assessing pesticide exposure =====
Multiple challenges exist in assessing exposure to pesticides in the general population, and many others that are specific to occupational exposures of agricultural workers. Beyond farm workers, estimating exposure to family members and children presents additional challenges, and may occur through "take-home" exposure from pesticide residues collected on clothing or equipment belonging to parent farm workers and inadvertently brought into the home. Children may also be exposed to pesticides prenatally from mothers who are exposed to pesticides during pregnancy. Characterizing children's exposure resulting from drift of airborne and spray application of pesticides is similarly challenging, yet well documented in developing countries. Because of critical development periods of the fetus and newborn children, these non-working populations are more vulnerable to the effects of pesticides, and may be at increased risk of developing neurocognitive effects and impaired development.
While measuring biomarkers or markers of biological effects may provide more accurate estimates of exposure, collecting these data in the field is often impractical and many methods are not sensitive enough to detect low-level concentrations. Rapid cholinesterase test kits exist to collect blood samples in the field. Conducting large scale assessments of agricultural workers in remote regions of developing countries makes the implementation of these kits a challenge. The cholinesterase assay is a useful clinical tool to assess individual exposure and acute toxicity. Considerable variability in baseline enzyme activity among individuals makes it difficult to compare field measurements of cholinesterase activity to a reference dose to determine health risk associated with exposure. Another challenge in deriving a reference dose is identifying health endpoints that are relevant to exposure. More epidemiological research is needed to identify critical health endpoints, particularly among populations who are occupationally exposed.
==== Prevention ====
Minimizing harmful exposure to pesticides can be achieved by proper use of personal protective equipment, adequate reentry times into recently sprayed areas, and effective product labeling for hazardous substances as per FIFRA regulations. Training high-risk populations, including agricultural workers, on the proper use and storage of pesticides, can reduce the incidence of acute pesticide poisoning and potential chronic health effects associated with exposure. Continued research into the human toxic health effects of pesticides serves as a basis for relevant policies and enforceable standards that are health protective to all populations.
=== Environmental effects ===
Pesticide use raises a number of environmental concerns. Over 98% of sprayed insecticides and 95% of herbicides reach a destination other than their target species, including non-target species, air, water and soil. Pesticide drift occurs when pesticides suspended in the air as particles are carried by wind to other areas, potentially contaminating them. Pesticides are one of the causes of water pollution, and some pesticides were persistent organic pollutants (now banned), which contribute to soil and flower (pollen, nectar) contamination. Furthermore, pesticide use can adversely impact neighboring agricultural activity, as pests themselves drift to and harm nearby crops that have no pesticide used on them.
In addition, pesticide use reduces invertebrate biodiversity in streams, contributes to pollinator decline, destroys habitat (especially for birds), and threatens endangered species. Pests can develop a resistance to the pesticide (pesticide resistance), necessitating a new pesticide. Alternatively a greater dose of the pesticide can be used to counteract the resistance, although this will cause a worsening of the ambient pollution problem.
The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants banned all persistent pesticides, in particular DDT and other organochlorine pesticides, which were stable and lipophilic, and thus able to bioaccumulate in the body and the food chain. and which spread throughout the planet. Persistent pesticides are no longer used for agriculture, and will not be approved by the authorities. Because the half life in soil is long (for DDT 2–15 years) residues can still be detected in humans at levels 5 to 10 times lower than found in the 1970s.
Pesticides now have to be degradable in the environment. Such degradation of pesticides is due to both innate chemical properties of the compounds and environmental processes or conditions. For example, the presence of halogens within a chemical structure often slows down degradation in an aerobic environment. Adsorption to soil may retard pesticide movement, but also may reduce bioavailability to microbial degraders.
Pesticide contamination in the environment can be monitored through bioindicators such as bee pollinators.
=== Economics ===
In one study, the human health and environmental costs due to pesticides in the United States was estimated to be $9.6 billion: offset by about $40 billion in increased agricultural production.
Additional costs include the registration process and the cost of purchasing pesticides: which are typically borne by agrichemical companies and farmers respectively. The registration process can take several years to complete (there are 70 types of field tests) and can cost $50–70 million for a single pesticide. At the beginning of the 21st century, the United States spent approximately $10 billion on pesticides annually.
== Resistance ==
The use of pesticides inherently entails the risk of resistance developing. Various techniques and procedures of pesticide application can slow the development of resistance, as can some natural features of the target population and surrounding environment.
== Alternatives ==
Alternatives to pesticides are available and include food irradiation, phytosanitary irradiation, methods of cultivation, use of biological pest controls (such as pheromones and microbial pesticides), genetic engineering (mostly of crops), and methods of interfering with insect breeding. Application of composted yard waste has also been used as a way of controlling pests. These methods are becoming increasingly popular and often are safer than traditional chemical pesticides.
=== Cultivation practices ===
Cultivation practices include polyculture (growing multiple types of plants), crop rotation, planting crops in areas where the pests that damage them do not live, timing planting according to when pests will be least problematic, and use of trap crops that attract pests away from the real crop. Trap crops have successfully controlled pests in some commercial agricultural systems while reducing pesticide usage. In other systems, trap crops can fail to reduce pest densities at a commercial scale, even when the trap crop works in controlled experiments.
=== Use of other organisms ===
Release of other organisms that fight the pest is another example of an alternative to pesticide use. These organisms can include natural predators or parasites of the pests. Biological pesticides based on entomopathogenic fungi, bacteria and viruses causing disease in the pest species can also be used.
=== Biological control engineering ===
Interfering with insects' reproduction can be accomplished by sterilizing males of the target species and releasing them, so that they mate with females but do not produce offspring. This technique was first used on the screwworm fly in 1958 and has since been used with the medfly, the tsetse fly, and the gypsy moth. This is a costly and slow approach that only works on some types of insects.
=== Other alternatives ===
Other alternatives include "laserweeding" – the use of novel agricultural robots for weed control using lasers.
=== Push pull strategy ===
Push-pull technique: intercropping with a "push" crop that repels the pest, and planting a "pull" crop on the boundary that attracts and traps it.
=== Effectiveness ===
Some evidence shows that alternatives to pesticides can be equally effective as the use of chemicals. A study of Maize fields in northern Florida found that the application of composted yard waste with high carbon to nitrogen ratio to agricultural fields was highly effective at reducing the population of plant-parasitic nematodes and increasing crop yield, with yield increases ranging from 10% to 212%; the observed effects were long-term, often not appearing until the third season of the study. Additional silicon nutrition protects some horticultural crops against fungal diseases almost completely, while insufficient silicon sometimes leads to severe infection even when fungicides are used.
Pesticide resistance is increasing and that may make alternatives more attractive.
== Types ==
=== Biopesticides ===
Biopesticides are certain types of pesticides derived from such natural materials as animals, plants, bacteria, and certain minerals. For example, canola oil and baking soda have pesticidal applications and are considered biopesticides. Biopesticides fall into three major classes:
Microbial pesticides which consist of bacteria, entomopathogenic fungi or viruses (and sometimes includes the metabolites that bacteria or fungi produce). Entomopathogenic nematodes are also often classed as microbial pesticides, even though they are multi-cellular.
Biochemical pesticides or herbal pesticides are naturally occurring substances that control (or monitor in the case of pheromones) pests and microbial diseases.
Plant-incorporated protectants (PIPs) have genetic material from other species incorporated into their genetic material (i.e. GM crops). Their use is controversial, especially in many European countries.
=== By pest type ===
Pesticides that are related to the type of pests are:
== Regulation ==
=== International ===
In many countries, pesticides must be approved for sale and use by a government agency.
Worldwide, 85% of countries have pesticide legislation for the proper storage of pesticides and 51% include provisions to ensure proper disposal of all obsolete pesticides.
Though pesticide regulations differ from country to country, pesticides, and products on which they were used are traded across international borders. To deal with inconsistencies in regulations among countries, delegates to a conference of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization adopted an International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides in 1985 to create voluntary standards of pesticide regulation for many countries. The Code was updated in 1998 and 2002. The FAO claims that the code has raised awareness about pesticide hazards and decreased the number of countries without restrictions on pesticide use.
Three other efforts to improve regulation of international pesticide trade are the United Nations London Guidelines for the Exchange of Information on Chemicals in International Trade and the United Nations Codex Alimentarius Commission. The former seeks to implement procedures for ensuring that prior informed consent exists between countries buying and selling pesticides, while the latter seeks to create uniform standards for maximum levels of pesticide residues among participating countries.
=== United States ===
In the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is responsible for regulating pesticides under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) and the Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA).
Studies must be conducted to establish the conditions in which the material is safe to use and the effectiveness against the intended pest(s). The EPA regulates pesticides to ensure that these products do not pose adverse effects to humans or the environment, with an emphasis on the health and safety of children. Pesticides produced before November 1984 continue to be reassessed in order to meet the current scientific and regulatory standards. All registered pesticides are reviewed every 15 years to ensure they meet the proper standards. During the registration process, a label is created. The label contains directions for proper use of the material in addition to safety restrictions. Based on acute toxicity, pesticides are assigned to a Toxicity Class. Pesticides are the most thoroughly tested chemicals after drugs in the United States; those used on food require more than 100 tests to determine a range of potential impacts.
Some pesticides are considered too hazardous for sale to the general public and are designated restricted use pesticides. Only certified applicators, who have passed an exam, may purchase or supervise the application of restricted use pesticides. Records of sales and use are required to be maintained and may be audited by government agencies charged with the enforcement of pesticide regulations. These records must be made available to employees and state or territorial environmental regulatory agencies.
In addition to the EPA, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) set standards for the level of pesticide residue that is allowed on or in crops. The EPA looks at what the potential human health and environmental effects might be associated with the use of the pesticide.
In addition, the U.S. EPA uses the National Research Council's four-step process for human health risk assessment: (1) Hazard Identification, (2) Dose-Response Assessment, (3) Exposure Assessment, and (4) Risk Characterization.
In 2013 Kaua'i County (Hawaiʻi) passed Bill No. 2491 to add an article to Chapter 22 of the county's code relating to pesticides and GMOs. The bill strengthens protections of local communities in Kaua'i where many large pesticide companies test their products.
The first legislation providing federal authority for regulating pesticides was enacted in 1910.
In the United States, the EPA gives priority to registering conventional, "Reduced-Risk Pesticides" that "pose less risk to human health and the environment than existing conventional alternatives". Their benefits include lower impact on human health and other living organisms, reduced groundwater contamination, and lower dose rates.
=== Canada ===
=== EU ===
EU legislation has been approved banning the use of highly toxic pesticides including those that are carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to reproduction, those that are endocrine-disrupting, and those that are persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic (PBT) or very persistent and very bioaccumulative (vPvB) and measures have been approved to improve the general safety of pesticides across all EU member states.
In 2023 The Environment Committee of European Parliament approved a decision aiming to reduce pesticide use by 50% (the most hazardous by 65%) by the year 2030 and ensure sustainable use of pesticides (for example use them only as a last resort). The decision also includes measures for providing farmers with alternatives.
== Residue ==
Pesticide residue refers to the pesticides that may remain on or in food after they are applied to food crops. The maximum residue limits (MRL) of pesticides in food are carefully set by the regulatory authorities to ensure, to their best judgement, no health impacts. Regulations such as pre-harvest intervals also often prevent harvest of crop or livestock products if recently treated in order to allow residue concentrations to decrease over time to safe levels before harvest. Exposure of the general population to these residues most commonly occurs through consumption of treated food sources, or being in close contact to areas treated with pesticides such as farms or lawns.
Persistent pesticides are no longer used for agriculture, and will not be approved by the authorities. Because the half life in soil is long (for DDT 2–15 years) residues can still be detected in humans at levels 5 to 10 times lower than found in the 1970s.
Residues are monitored by the authorities. In 2016, over 99% of samples of US produce had no pesticide residue or had residue levels well below the EPA tolerance levels for each pesticide.
== See also ==
Index of pesticide articles
Environmental hazard
Pest control
Pesticide residue
Pesticide standard value
WHO Pesticide Evaluation Scheme
== Sources ==
== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
Davis, Frederick Rowe. "Pesticides and the perils of synecdoche in the history of science and environmental history." History of Science 57.4 (2019): 469–492.
Davis, Frederick Rowe. Banned: a history of pesticides and the science of toxicology (Yale UP, 2014).
Matthews, Graham A. A history of pesticides (CABI, 2018).
S.Safe, H.Plugge, J.F.S.Crocker (1977). "Analysis of an aromatic solvent used in a forest spray program". Chemosphere. 6 (10): 641–651. Bibcode:1977Chmsp...6..641S. doi:10.1016/0045-6535(77)90075-3.
== Sources ==
== External links ==
Pesticides at the World Health Organization (WHO)
Pesticides at the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Pesticides at the European Commission
Pesticides at the United States Environmental Protection Agency

Compost is a mixture of ingredients used as plant fertilizer and to improve soil's physical, chemical, and biological properties. It is commonly prepared by decomposing plant and food waste, recycling organic materials, and manure. The resulting mixture is rich in plant nutrients and beneficial organisms, such as bacteria, protozoa, nematodes, and fungi. Compost improves soil fertility in gardens, landscaping, horticulture, urban agriculture, and organic farming, reducing dependency on commercial chemical fertilizers. The benefits of compost include providing nutrients to crops as fertilizer, acting as a soil conditioner, increasing the humus or humic acid contents of the soil, and introducing beneficial microbes that help to suppress pathogens in the soil and reduce soil-borne diseases.
At the most basic level, composting requires gathering a mix of green waste (nitrogen-rich materials such as leaves, grass, and food scraps) and brown waste (woody materials rich in carbon, such as stalks, paper, and wood chips). The materials break down into humus in a process taking months. Composting can be a multistep, closely monitored process with measured inputs of water, air, and carbon- and nitrogen-rich materials. The decomposition process is aided by shredding the plant matter, adding water, and ensuring proper aeration by regularly turning the mixture in a process using open piles or windrows. Fungi, earthworms, and other detritivores further break up the organic material. Aerobic bacteria and fungi manage the chemical process by converting the inputs into heat, carbon dioxide, and ammonium ions.
Composting is an important part of waste management, since food and other compostable materials make up about 20% of waste in landfills, and due to anaerobic conditions, these materials take longer to biodegrade in the landfill. Composting offers an environmentally superior alternative to using organic material for landfill because composting reduces methane emissions due to anaerobic conditions, and provides economic and environmental co-benefits. For example, compost can also be used for land and stream reclamation, wetland construction, and landfill cover.
== Fundamentals ==
Composting is an aerobic method of decomposing organic solid wastes, so it can be used to recycle organic material. The process involves decomposing organic material into a humus-like material, known as compost, which is a good fertilizer for plants.
Composting organisms require four equally important ingredients to work effectively:
Carbon is needed for energy; the microbial oxidation of carbon produces the heat required for other parts of the composting process. High carbon materials tend to be brown and dry.
Nitrogen is needed to grow and reproduce more organisms to oxidize the carbon. High nitrogen materials tend to be green and wet. They can also include colourful fruits and vegetables.
Oxygen is required for oxidizing the carbon, the decomposition process. Aerobic bacteria need oxygen levels above 5% to perform the processes needed for composting.
Water is necessary in the right amounts to maintain activity without causing locally anaerobic conditions.
Certain ratios of these materials allow microorganisms to work at a rate that will heat up the compost pile. Active management of the pile (e.g., turning over the compost heap) is needed to maintain sufficient oxygen and the right moisture level. The air/water balance is critical to maintaining high temperatures 130–160 °F (54–71 °C) until the materials are broken down.
Composting is most efficient with a carbon-to-nitrogen ratio of about 25:1. Hot composting focuses on retaining heat to increase the decomposition rate, thus producing compost more quickly. Rapid composting is favored by having a carbon-to-nitrogen ratio of about 30 carbon units or less. Above 30, the substrate is nitrogen starved. Below 15, it is likely to outgas a portion of nitrogen as ammonia.
Nearly all dead plant and animal materials have both carbon and nitrogen in different amounts. Fresh grass clippings have an average ratio of about 15:1 and dry autumn leaves about 50:1 depending upon species. Composting is an ongoing and dynamic process; adding new sources of carbon and nitrogen consistently, as well as active management, is important.
=== Organisms ===
Organisms can break down organic matter in compost if provided with the correct mixture of water, oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen. They fall into two broad categories: chemical decomposers, which perform chemical processes on the organic waste, and physical decomposers, which process the waste into smaller pieces through methods such as grinding, tearing, chewing, and digesting.
==== Chemical decomposers ====
Bacteria are the most abundant and important of all the microorganisms found in compost. Bacteria process carbon and nitrogen and excrete plant-available nutrients such as nitrogen, phosphorus, and magnesium. Depending on the phase of composting, mesophilic or thermophilic bacteria may be the most prominent.
Mesophilic bacteria get compost to the thermophilic stage through oxidation of organic material. Afterwards they cure it, which makes the fresh compost more bioavailable for plants.
Thermophilic bacteria do not reproduce and are not active between −5 and 25 °C (23 and 77 °F), yet are found throughout soil. They activate once the mesophilic bacteria have begun to break down organic matter and increase the temperature to their optimal range. They have been shown to enter soils via rainwater. They are present so broadly because of many factors, including their spores being resilient. Thermophilic bacteria thrive at higher temperatures, reaching 40–60 °C (104–140 °F) in typical mixes. Large-scale composting operations, such as windrow composting, may exceed this temperature, potentially killing beneficial soil microorganisms but also pasteurizing the waste.
Actinomycetota are needed to break down paper products such as newspaper, bark, etc., and other large molecules such as lignin and cellulose that are more difficult to decompose. The "pleasant, earthy smell of compost" is attributed to Actinomycetota. They make carbon, ammonia, and nitrogen nutrients available to plants.
Fungi such as molds and yeasts help break down materials that bacteria cannot, especially cellulose and lignin in woody material.
Protozoa contribute to biodegradation of organic matter and consume inactive bacteria, fungi, and micro-organic particulates.
==== Physical decomposers ====
Ants create nests, making the soil more porous and transporting nutrients to different areas of the compost.
Beetles such as grubs feed on decaying vegetables.
Earthworms ingest partly composted material and excrete worm castings, making nitrogen, calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium available to plants. The tunnels they create as they move through the compost also increase aeration and drainage.
Flies feed on almost all organic material and put bacteria into the compost. Their population is kept in check by mites and the thermophilic temperatures that are unsuitable for fly larvae.
Millipedes break down plant material.
Rotifers feed on plant particles.
Snails and slugs feed on living or fresh plant material. They should be removed from compost before use, as they can damage plants and crops.
Sow bugs feed on rotting wood and decaying vegetation.
Springtails feed on fungi, molds, and decomposing plants.
=== Phases of composting ===
Under ideal conditions, composting proceeds through three major phases:
Mesophilic phase: The initial, mesophilic phase is when the decomposition is carried out under moderate temperatures by mesophilic microorganisms. 2 to 8 days
Thermophilic phase: As the temperature rises, a second, thermophilic phase starts, in which various thermophilic bacteria carry out the decomposition under higher temperatures (50 to 60 °C (122 to 140 °F).)
Cooling phase (also called Mesophilic II)
Maturation phase: As the supply of high-energy compounds dwindles, the temperature starts to decrease.
Semicomposting is the degradation process that handles volumes of organic waste lower than that recommended for composting and therefore does not present a thermophilic stage, because mesophilic microorganisms are the only responsible ones, for the degradation of organic matter.
=== Hot and cold composting – impact on timing ===
The time required to compost material relates to the volume of material, the particle size of the inputs (e.g. wood chips break down faster than branches), and the amount of mixing and aeration. Generally, larger piles reach higher temperatures and remain in a thermophilic stage for days or weeks. This is hot composting and is the usual method for large-scale municipal facilities and agricultural operations.
The Berkeley method produces finished compost in 18 days. It requires assembly of at least 1 cubic metre (35 cu ft) of material at the outset and needs turning every two days after an initial four-day phase. Such short processes involve some changes to traditional methods, including smaller, more homogenized particle sizes in the input materials, controlling carbon-to-nitrogen ratio (C:N) at 30:1 or less, and careful monitoring of the moisture level.
Cold composting is a slower process that can take up to a year to complete. It results from smaller piles, including many residential compost piles that receive small amounts of kitchen and garden waste over extended periods. Piles smaller than 1 cubic metre (35 cu ft) tend not to reach and maintain high temperatures. Turning is not necessary with cold composting, although a risk exists that parts of the pile may go anaerobic as it becomes compacted or waterlogged.
=== Pathogen removal ===
Composting can destroy some pathogens and seeds, by reaching certain temperatures. Dealing with stabilized compost – i.e. composted material in which microorganisms have finished digesting the organic matter and the temperature has reached between 50 and 70 °C (122 and 158 °F) – poses very little risk, as these temperatures kill pathogens and even make oocysts unviable. The temperature at which a pathogen dies depends on the pathogen, how long the temperature is maintained (seconds to weeks), and pH.
Compost products such as compost tea and compost extracts have been found to have an inhibitory effect on Fusarium oxysporum, Rhizoctonia species, and Pythium debaryanum, plant pathogens that can cause crop diseases. Aerated compost teas are more effective than compost extracts. The microbiota and enzymes present in compost extracts also have a suppressive effect on fungal plant pathogens. Compost is a good source of biocontrol agents like B. subtilis, B. licheniformis, and P. chrysogenum that fight plant pathogens. Sterilizing the compost, compost tea, or compost extracts reduces the effect of pathogen suppression.
=== Diseases that can be contracted from handling compost ===
When turning compost that has not gone through phases where temperatures above 50 °C (122 °F) are reached, a mouth mask and gloves must be worn to protect from diseases that can be contracted from handling compost, including:
Aspergillosis
Farmer's lung
Histoplasmosis – a fungus that grows in guano and bird droppings
Legionnaires' disease
Paronychia – via infection around the fingernails and toenails
Tetanus – a central nervous system disease
Oocytes are rendered unviable by temperatures over 50 °C (122 °F).
== Environmental benefits ==
Compost adds organic matter to the soil and increases the nutrient content and biodiversity of microbes in soil. Composting at home reduces the amount of green waste being hauled to dumps or composting facilities. The reduced volume of materials being picked up by trucks results in fewer trips, which in turn lowers the overall emissions from the waste-management fleet.
== Materials that can be composted ==
Potential sources of compostable materials, or feedstocks, include residential, agricultural, and commercial waste streams. Residential food or yard waste can be composted at home, or collected for inclusion in a large-scale municipal composting facility. In some regions, it could also be included in a local or neighborhood composting project.
=== Organic solid waste ===
The two broad categories of organic solid waste are green and brown. Green waste is generally considered a source of nitrogen and includes pre- and post-consumer food waste, grass clippings, garden trimmings, and fresh leaves. Animal carcasses, roadkill, and butcher residue can also be composted, and these are considered nitrogen sources.
Brown waste is a carbon source. Typical examples are dried vegetation and woody material such as fallen leaves, straw, woodchips, limbs, logs, pine needles, sawdust, and wood ash, but not charcoal ash. Products derived from wood such as paper and plain cardboard are also considered carbon sources.
=== Animal manure and bedding ===
On many farms, the basic composting ingredients are animal manure generated on the farm as a nitrogen source, and bedding as the carbon source. Straw and sawdust are common bedding materials. Nontraditional bedding materials are also used, including newspaper and chopped cardboard. The amount of manure composted on a livestock farm is often determined by cleaning schedules, land availability, and weather conditions. Each type of manure has its own physical, chemical, and biological characteristics. Cattle and horse manures, when mixed with bedding, possess good qualities for composting. Swine manure, which is very wet and usually not mixed with bedding material, must be mixed with straw or similar raw materials. Poultry manure must be blended with high-carbon, low-nitrogen materials.
=== Human excreta ===
Human excreta, sometimes called "humanure" in the composting context, can be added as an input to the composting process since it is a nutrient-rich organic material. In soil, humanure helps to build organic matter, foster micronutrients, and develop healthy microbial communities. Nitrogen, which serves as a building block for important plant amino acids, is found in solid human waste. Phosphorus, which helps plants convert sunlight into energy in the form of ATP, can be found in liquid human waste. It is also an excellent source of potassium as a soil nutrient.
The term "humanure" is a neologism coined by organic farmer Joseph Jenkins.
Solid human waste can be collected directly in composting toilets, or indirectly in the form of sewage sludge after it has undergone treatment in a sewage treatment plant. Both processes require capable design, as potential health risks need to be managed. In the case of home composting, a wide range of microorganisms, including bacteria, viruses, and parasitic worms, can be present in feces, and improper processing can pose significant health risks.
In the case of large sewage treatment facilities that collect wastewater from a range of residential, commercial and industrial sources, there are additional considerations. The composted sewage sludge, referred to as biosolids, can be contaminated with a variety of metals and pharmaceutical compounds. Insufficient processing of biosolids can also lead to problems when the material is applied to land.
Humanure's potential to spread disease can be managed through proper fermentation process, which can kill or neutralize pathogens and parasite eggs within two weeks to six months, depending on climate.
Urine can be put on compost piles or directly used as fertilizer. Adding urine to compost can increase temperatures, so can increase its ability to destroy pathogens and unwanted seeds. Unlike feces, urine does not attract disease-spreading flies (such as houseflies or blowflies), and it does not contain the most hardy of pathogens, such as parasitic worm eggs.
=== Animal remains ===
Animal carcasses may be composted as a disposal option. Such material is rich in nitrogen.
=== Human bodies ===
== Composting technologies ==
=== Industrial-scale composting ===
==== In-vessel composting ====
==== Aerated static-pile composting ====
==== Windrow composting ====
=== Other systems at household level ===
==== Hügelkultur (raised garden beds or mounds) ====
The practice of making raised garden beds or mounds filled with rotting wood is also called Hügelkultur in German. It is in effect creating a nurse log that is covered with soil.
Benefits of Hügelkultur garden beds include water retention and warming of soil. Buried wood acts like a sponge as it decomposes, able to capture water and store it for later use by crops planted on top of the bed.
==== Composting toilets ====
=== Related technologies ===
Vermicompost (also called worm castings, worm humus, worm manure, or worm faeces) is the end product of the breakdown of organic matter by earthworms. These castings have been shown to contain reduced levels of contaminants and a higher saturation of nutrients than the organic materials before vermicomposting.
Black soldier fly (Hermetia illucens) larvae are able to rapidly consume large amounts of organic material and can be used to treat human waste. The resulting compost still contains nutrients and can be used for biogas production, or further traditional composting or vermicomposting
Bokashi is a fermentation process rather than a decomposition process, and so retains the feedstock's energy, nutrient and carbon contents. There must be sufficient carbohydrate for fermentation to complete and therefore the process is typically applied to food waste, including noncompostable items. Carbohydrate is transformed into lactic acid, which dissociates naturally to form lactate, a biological energy carrier. The preserved result is therefore readily consumed by soil microbes and from there by the entire soil food web, leading to a significant increase in soil organic carbon and turbation. The process completes in weeks and returns soil acidity to normal.
Co-composting is a technique that processes organic solid waste together with other input materials such as dewatered fecal sludge or sewage sludge.
Anaerobic digestion combined with mechanical sorting of mixed waste streams is increasingly being used in developed countries due to regulations controlling the amount of organic matter allowed in landfills. Treating biodegradable waste before it enters a landfill reduces global warming from fugitive methane; untreated waste breaks down anaerobically in a landfill, producing landfill gas that contains methane, a potent greenhouse gas. The methane produced in an anaerobic digester can be used as biogas.
Small-scale and organic farms can also produce aerobic compost piles for crop bed preparation using a "turned pile" technique in which piles are formed with the appropriate ratios of nitrous, carbonous, and neutral materials, checked with a temperature gauge, and turned by-hand at weekly intervals.
== Uses ==
=== Agriculture and gardening ===
On open ground for growing wheat, corn, soybeans, and similar crops, compost can be broadcast across the top of the soil using spreader trucks or spreaders pulled behind a tractor. It is expected that the spread layer is very thin (approximately 6 mm (0.24 in)) and worked into the soil prior to planting. Application rates of 25 mm (0.98 in) or more are not unusual when trying to rebuild poor soils or control erosion. In countries such as Germany, where compost distribution and spreading are partially subsidized in the original waste fees, compost is used more frequently on open ground on the premise of nutrient "sustainability".
In plasticulture, strawberries, tomatoes, peppers, melons, and other fruits and vegetables are grown under plastic to control temperature, retain moisture and control weeds. Compost may be banded (applied in strips along rows) and worked into the soil prior to bedding and planting, be applied at the same time the beds are constructed and plastic laid down, or used as a top dressing.
Many crops are not seeded directly in the field but are started in seed trays in a greenhouse. When the seedlings reach a certain stage of growth, they are transplanted in the field. Compost may be part of the mix used to grow the seedlings, but is not normally used as the only planting substrate. The particular crop and the seeds' sensitivity to nutrients, salts, etc. dictates the ratio of the blend, and maturity is important to insure that oxygen deprivation will not occur or that no lingering phyto-toxins remain.
Compost can be added to soil, coir, or peat, as a tilth improver, supplying humus and nutrients. It provides a rich growing medium as absorbent material. This material contains moisture and soluble minerals, which provide support and nutrients. Although it is rarely used alone, plants can flourish from mixed soil that includes a mix of compost with other additives such as sand, grit, bark chips, vermiculite, perlite, or clay granules to produce loam. Compost can be tilled directly into the soil or growing medium to boost the level of organic matter and the overall fertility of the soil. Compost that is ready to be used as an additive is dark brown or even black with an earthy smell.
Generally, direct seeding into a compost is not recommended due to the speed with which it may dry, the possible presence of phytotoxins in immature compost that may inhibit germination, and the possible tie up of nitrogen by incompletely decomposed lignin. It is very common to see blends of 20–30% compost used for transplanting seedlings.
Compost can be used to increase plant immunity to diseases and pests.
==== Compost tea ====
Compost tea is made up of extracts of fermented water leached from composted materials. Composts can be either aerated or non-aerated depending on its fermentation process. Compost teas are generally produced from adding compost to water in a ratio of 1:4–1:10, occasionally stirring to release microbes.
There is debate about the benefits of aerating the mixture. Non-aerated compost tea is cheaper and less labor-intensive, but there are conflicting studies regarding the risks of phytotoxicity and human pathogen regrowth. Aerated compost tea brews faster and generates more microbes, but has potential for human pathogen regrowth, particularly when one adds additional nutrients to the mixture.
Field studies have shown the benefits of adding compost teas to crops due to organic matter input, increased nutrient availability, and increased microbial activity. They have also been shown to have a suppressive effect on plant pathogens and soil-borne diseases. The efficacy is influenced by a number of factors, such as the preparation process, the type of source the conditions of the brewing process, and the environment of the crops. Adding nutrients to compost tea can be beneficial for disease suppression, although it can trigger the regrowth of human pathogens like E. coli and Salmonella.
==== Compost extract ====
Compost extracts are unfermented or non-brewed extracts of leached compost contents dissolved in any solvent.
==== Commercial sale ====
Compost is sold as bagged potting mixes in garden centers and other outlets. This may include composted materials such as manure and peat but is also likely to contain loam, fertilizers, sand, grit, etc. Varieties include multi-purpose composts designed for most aspects of planting, John Innes formulations, grow bags, designed to have crops such as tomatoes directly planted into them. There are also a range of specialist composts available, e.g. for vegetables, orchids, houseplants, hanging baskets, roses, ericaceous plants, seedlings, potting on, etc.
==== Community composting ====
Community composting uses organic materials sourced from a local community. Sites used for compost piles include educational institutions or community gardens. Community composting programs may be involved in community education. The compost generated is used locally. Each community composting operation is generally smaller than a commercial composting operation.
=== Other ===
Compost can also be used for land and stream reclamation, wetland construction, and landfill cover.
The temperatures generated by compost can be used to heat greenhouses, such as by being placed around the outside edges.
== Regulations ==
There are process and product guidelines in Europe that date to the early 1980s (Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland) and only more recently in the UK and the US. In both these countries, private trade associations within the industry have established loose standards, some say as a stop-gap measure to discourage independent government agencies from establishing tougher consumer-friendly standards. Compost is regulated in Canada and Australia as well.
EPA Class A and B guidelines in the United States were developed solely to manage the processing and beneficial reuse of sludge, also now called biosolids, following the US EPA ban of ocean dumping. About 26 American states now require composts to be processed according to these federal protocols for pathogen and vector control, even though the application to non-sludge materials has not been scientifically tested. An example is that green waste composts are used at much higher rates than sludge composts were ever anticipated to be applied at. U.K guidelines also exist regarding compost quality, as well as Canadian, Australian, and the various European states.
In the United States, some compost manufacturers participate in a testing program offered by a private lobbying organization called the U.S. Composting Council. The USCC was originally established in 1991 by Procter & Gamble to promote composting of disposable diapers, following state mandates to ban diapers in landfills, which caused a national uproar. Ultimately the idea of composting diapers was abandoned, partly since it was not proven scientifically to be possible, and mostly because the concept was a marketing stunt in the first place. After this, composting emphasis shifted back to recycling organic wastes previously destined for landfills. There are no bonafide quality standards in America, but the USCC sells a seal called "Seal of Testing Assurance" (also called "STA"). For a considerable fee, the applicant may display the USCC logo on products, agreeing to volunteer to customers a current laboratory analysis that includes parameters such as nutrients, respiration rate, salt content, pH, and limited other indicators.
Many countries such as Wales and some individual cities such as Seattle and San Francisco require food and yard waste to be sorted for composting (San Francisco Mandatory Recycling and Composting Ordinance).
The US is the only Western country that does not distinguish sludge-source compost from green-composts, and by default 50% of US states expect composts to comply in some manner with the federal EPA 503 rule promulgated in 1984 for sludge products.
There are health risk concerns about PFASs ("forever chemicals") levels in compost derived from sewage sledge sourced biosolids, and EPA has not set health risk standards for this. The Sierra Club recommends that home gardeners avoid the use of sewage sludge-base fertilizer and compost, in part due to potentially high levels of PFASs. The EPA PFAS Strategic Roadmap initiative, running from 2021 to 2024, will consider the full lifecycle of PFAS including health risks of PFAS in wastewater sludge.
== History ==
Composting dates back to at least the early Roman Empire and was mentioned as early as Cato the Elder's 160 BCE piece De Agri Cultura. Traditionally, composting involved piling organic materials until the next planting season, at which time the materials would have decayed enough to be ready for use in the soil. Methodologies for organic composting were part of traditional agricultural systems around the world.
Composting began to modernize somewhat in the 1920s in Europe as a tool for organic farming. The first industrial station for the transformation of urban organic materials into compost was set up in Wels, Austria, in the year 1921. Early proponents of composting in farming include Rudolf Steiner, founder of a farming method called biodynamics, and Annie Francé-Harrar, who was appointed on behalf of the government in Mexico and supported the country in 1950–1958 to set up a large humus organization in the fight against erosion and soil degradation. Sir Albert Howard, who worked extensively in India on sustainable practices, and Lady Eve Balfour were also major proponents of composting. Modern scientific composting was imported to America by the likes of J. I. Rodale – founder of Rodale, Inc. Organic Gardening, and others involved in the organic farming movement.
== See also ==
== References ==
== External links ==
Media related to Compost at Wikimedia Commons
Category:Composting at Wikibooks

Produced by Louise Pryor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
[Transcriber's note
Spellings are inconsistent, especially the use of ee and ee. Notes of
changes that have been made for obvious misprints, and of other
anomalies, are at the end of this etext.
There are many sidenotes in the original. They are indicated thus:
{SN: }, and have been grouped together at the start of the paragraph
in which they appear.]
THE
ENGLISH
HVSBANDMAN.
* * * * *
_The first Part_:
CONTAYNING
the Knowledge of the true Nature
of euery Soyle within this Kingdome:
how to Plow it; and the manner of the
Plough, and other Instruments
belonging thereto.
_TOGETHER WITH THE_
Art of Planting, Grafting, and Gardening
after our latest and rarest fashion.
A worke neuer written before by any Author:
and now newly compiled for the benefit
of this KINGDOME.
_By_ G. M.
_Bramo assai, poco, spero nulla chieggio._
_LONDON:_ Printed by _T. S._ for _Iohn Browne_, and are to be sould at
his shop in Saint _Dunstanes_ Church-yard.
1613.
TO THE RIGHT
HONOVRABLE,
and his singular good Lord,
the Lord _Clifton_, Baron of
Layton.
It was a custome (right Honorable, and my most singular good Lord) both
amongst the auntient _Romans_, and also amongst the wise
_Lacedemonians_, that euery idle person should giue an account of the
expence of his howers: Now I that am most idle, and least imployed in
your Familie, present here vnto your Lordships hands an account of the
expence of my idle time, which how well, or ill, it is, your Noble
wisedome must both iudge and correct; onely this I am acertain'd, that
for the generall rules and Maximes of the whole worke, they are most
infallibly true, and perfectly agreeing with our English climate. Now if
your Lordship shall doubt of the true tast of the liquor because it
proceedeth from such a vessell as my selfe, whom you may imagine vtterly
vnseasoned vvith any of these knowledges, beleeue it (my most best Lord)
that for diuers yeeres, wherein I liued most happily, I liued a
Husbandman, amongst Husbandmen of most excellent knowledge; during all
which time I let no obseruation ouer-slip me: for I haue euer from my
Cradle beene naturally giuen to obserue, and albe I haue not that oylie
tongue of ostentation which loueth euer to be babling all, and somewhat
more then it knoweth, drawing from ignorance admiration, and from
wisedome laughter, filling meale-times with much vnprofitable noyse; yet
I thanke my maker I haue a breast which containeth contentment inough
for my selfe, and I hope much benefit for the whole Kingdome; how euer
or whatsoeuer it is, it is all your Lordships, vnder the couert of whose
fauourable protection if it may finde grace it is the vttermost aime
whereunto my wishes aspire, nor shall I feare the malignitie of the
curious, for it is not to them but the honest plaine English Husbandman,
I intend my labours, vvhose defender you haue euer beene, and for whose
Honorable prosperitie both they and I will continually pray.
_Your honours in all
seruiceable humblenesse_,
G. M.
The Epistle to the generall and gentle Reader.
Although (generall reader) the nature of this worst part of this last
age hath conuerted all things to such vildnesse that whatsoeuer is
truely good is now esteemed most vitious, learning being derided,
fortitude drawne into so many definitions that it consisteth in meere
words onely, and although nothing is happy or prosperous, but meere
fashion & ostentation, a tedious fustian-tale at a great mans table,
stuft with bigge words, with out sence, or a mimicke Iester, that can
play three parts in one; the Foole, the Pandar and the Parasit, yet
notwithstanding in this apostate age I haue aduentured to thrust into
the world this booke, which nothing at all belongeth to the silken
scorner, but to the plaine russet honest Husbandman, for whose
particular benefit, and the kingdomes generall profit, I haue with much
paine, care, and industry, passed through the same. Now for the motiues
which first drew me to vndertake the worke, they were diuers: as first,
when I saw one man translate and paraphrase most excellently vpon
_Virgils Georgickes_, a worke onely belonging to the Italian climbe, &
nothing agreeable with ours another translates _Libault & Steuens_, a
worke of infinit excellency, yet onely proper and naturall to the
French, and not to vs: and another takes collections from _Zenophon_, and
others; all forrainers and vtterly vnacquainted with our climbes: when
this I beheld, and saw with what good liking they were entertained of
all men; and that euery man was dumbe to speake any thing of the
_Husbandry_ of our owne kingdome, I could not but imagine it a worke most
acceptable to men, and most profitable to the kingdome, to set downe the
true manner and nature of our right English _Husbandry_, our soyle being
as delicate, apt, and fit for increase as any forraine soyle whatsoeuer,
and as farre out-going other kingdomes in some commoditie, as they vs in
other some. Hence, and from these considerations, I began this worke, of
which I haue here sent thee but a small tast, which if I finde accepted,
according to mine intent, I will not cease (God permitting mee life) to
passe through all manner of English _Husbandry_ and _Huswifery_ whatsoeuer,
without omission of the least scruple that can any way belong to either
of their knowledges. Now gentle reader whereas you may be driuen to some
amazement, at two titles which insue in the booke, namely, a former part
before the first, and the first part, you shall vnderstand that those
first sheetes were detained both from the Stationer and me, till the
booke was almost all printed; and my selfe by extreame sicknesse kept
from ouer-viewing the same, wherefore I must intreate your fauour in
this impression and the rather in as much as there wanteth neither any
of the words or matter whatsoeuer: _Farewell_.
Thine
_G. M._
FORMER PART,
before the first Part: Being an absolute perfect Introduction into
all the Rules of true Husbandry; and must first of all be read, or
the Readers labour will be frustrate.
CHAP. I.
_The Proem of the Author. What a Husbandman is: His Vtilitie and
Necessitie._
It is a common Adage in our English speech, that a man generally seene
in all things can bee particularly perfect or compleate in none: Which
Prouerbe there is no question will both by the curious and enuious be
heauily imposed vpon my backe, because in this, and other workes, I haue
delt with many things of much importance, and such as any one of them
would require a whole liues experience, whereas neither my Birth, my
Education, nor the generall course of my life can promise no
singularitie in any part of those Artes they treate of: but for
suggestions (the liberty whereof the wisedome of Kings could neuer
bridle) let them poison themselues with their owne gall, they shall not
so much as make me looke ouer my shoulder from my labour: onely to the
curteous and well meaning I giue this satisfaction, I am but onely a
publique Notary, who record the most true and infallible experience of
the best knowing Husbands in this land.
Besides, I am not altogether vnseene in these misteries I write of: for
it is well knowne I followed the profession of a Husbandman so long my
selfe, as well might make mee worthy to be a graduate in the vocation:
wherein my simplicitie was not such but I both obserued well those which
were esteemed famous in the profession, and preserued to my selfe those
rules which I found infallible by experience. _Virgill_ was an excellent
Poet, and a seruant, of trusty account, to _Augustus_, whose court and
study-imployments would haue said he should haue little knowledge in
rurall businesse, yet who hath set downe more excellently the manner of
Italian Husbandry then himselfe, being a perfect lanthorne, from whose
light both Italie and other countries haue seene to trace into the true
path of profit and frugallitie? _Steuens_ and _Libault_, two famous
Phisitions, a profession that neuer medleth with the Plough, yet who
hath done more rarely! nay, their workes are vtterly vncontrolable
touching all manner of french Husbandry whatsoeuer; so my selfe although
by profession I am onely a horse-man, it being the predominant outward
vertue I can boast of, yet why may not I, hauing the sence of man, by
the ayde of obseruation and relation, set downe all the rules and
principles of our English Husbandry in as good and as perfect order as
any of the former? there is no doubt but I may and this I dare bouldly
assure vnto all Readers that there is not any rule prescribed through
this whole worke, but hath his authoritie from as good and well
experienced men, in the Art of which the rule treateth, as any this
kingdome can produce: neither haue I beene so hasty, or willing, to
publish this part as men may imagining, for it is well knowne it hath
laine at rest this many yeeres, and onely now at the Instigation of
many of my friends is bolted into the world, to try the censure of wits,
and to giue aide to the ignorant Husbandman. Wherefore to leaue off any
further digression, I will fall to mine intended purpose: and because
the whole scope of my labour hath all his aime and reuerence to the
English Husbandman, I will first shew you what a Husbandman is.
{SN: The definition of a Husbandman.}
A Husbandman is he which with discretion and good order tilleth the
ground in his due seasons, making it fruitfull to bring forth Corne, and
plants, meete for the sustenance of man. This Husbandman is he to whom
God in the scriptures giueth many blessings, for his labours of all
other are most excellent, and therefore to be a Husbandman is to be a
good man; whence the auntients did baptise, and wee euen to this day doe
seriously obserue to call euery Husbandman, both in our ordinary
conference and euery particular salutation, goodman such a one, a title
(if wee rightly obserue it) of more honour and vertuous note, then many
which precede it at feasts and in gaudy places.
{SN: The Vtillitie of the Husbandman.}
A Husbandman is the Maister of the earth, turning sterillitie and
barrainenesse, into fruitfulnesse and increase, whereby all common
wealths are maintained and upheld, it is his labour which giueth bread
to all men and maketh vs forsake the societie of beasts drinking vpon
the water springs, feeding vs with a much more nourishing liquor. The
labour of the Husbandman giueth liberty to all vocations, Arts,
misteries and trades, to follow their seuerall functions, with peace and
industry, for the filling and emptying of his barnes is the increase and
prosperitie of all their labours. To conclude, what can we say in this
world is profitable where Husbandry is wanting, it being the great Nerue
and Sinew which houldeth together all the ioynts of a Monarchie?
{SN: Of the necessitie of a Husbandman.}
Now for the necessitie, the profit inferreth it without any larger
amplification: for if of all things it be most profitable, then of all
things it must needs be most necessary, sith next vnto heauenly things,
profit is the whole aime of our liues in this world: besides it is most
necessary for keeping the earth in order, which else would grow wilde,
and like a wildernesse, brambles and weeds choaking vp better Plants,
and nothing remayning but a Chaos of confusednesse. And thus much of the
Husbandman his vtillity and necessitie.
CHAP. II.
_Of the situation of the Husbandmans house; the necessaries there to
belonging, together with the modell thereof._
Since couerture is the most necessariest thing belonging vnto mans life,
and that it was the first thing that euer man inuented, I thinke it not
amisse first to beginne, before I enter into any other part of
Husbandry, with the Husbandmans house, without which no Husbandry can be
maintained or preserued. And albeit the generall Husbandman must take
such a house as hee can conueniently get, and according to the custome
and abillitie of the soyle wherein he liueth, for many countries are
very much vnprouided of generall matter for well building: some wanting
timber, some stone, some lime, some one thing, some another: yet to that
Husbandman whom God hath enabled with power both of riches and euery
other necessary fit to haue all things in a comely conuenientnesse about
him, if he desire to plant himselfe decently and profitable, I would
then aduise him to chuse for his situation no high hill, or great
promontary (the seate of Princes Courts) where hee may be gazed vpon by
the eye of euery traueller, but some pretty hard knole of constant and
firme earth, rather assending then descending, free from the danger of
water, and being inuironed either with some pretty groues, of tall
young spiers, or else with rowes of greater timber, which besids the
pleasure and profit thereof (hauing wode so neare a mans dore) the
shelter will be most excellent to keepe off the bleaknesse of the sharpe
stormes and tempests in winter, and be an excellent wormestall for
cattell in the summer. This house would be planted, if possible, neare
to some riuer, or fresh running brooke, but by no meanes vpon the verge
of the riuer, nor within the danger of the ouerflow thereof: for the one
is subiect to too much coldnesse and moisture, the other to danger. You
shall plant the face, or forefront, of your house vpon the rising of the
Sunne, that the vigor of his warmth may at no time depart from some part
thereof, but that as he riseth on the oneside so he may set on the
other. You shall place the vpper or best end of your house, as namely,
where your dining Parlor and cheifest roomes are, which euer would haue
their prospect into your garden, to the South, that your buttery,
kitching and other inferiour offices may stand to the North, coldnesse
bringing vnto them a manifold benefit. Now touching the forme, fashion,
or modell of the house, it is impossible almost for any man to prescribe
a certaine forme, the world is so plentifull in inuention and euery mans
minde so much adicted to nouelty and curiouity, yet for as much as it is
most commended by the generall consent of all the auntients, and that
from the modell of that proportion may be contracted and drawne the most
curious formes that are almost at this day extant, I will commend vnto
you that modell which beareth the proportion of the Roman _H._ which as
it is most plaine of all other, and most easie for conuaiance, so if a
man vpon that plaine song, (hauing a great purse) will make descant,
there is no proportion in which he may with best ease show more
curiositie, and therefore for the plaine Husbandmans better
vnderstanding I will here shew him a _facsimile_ (for to adde a scale
were needlesse in this generall worke, all men not being desirous to
build of one bignesse) & this it is:
{Illustration}
Here you behould the modell of a plaine country mans house, without
plaster or imbosture, because it is to be intended that it is as well to
be built of studde and plaster, as of lime and stone, or if timber be
not plentifull it may be built of courser woode, and couered with lime
and haire, yet if a man would bestow cost in this modell, the foure
inward corners of the hall would be conuenient for foure turrets, and
the foure gauell ends, being thrust out with bay windowes might be
formed in any curious manner: and where I place a gate and a plaine
pale, might be either a tarrisse, or a gatehouse: of any fashion
whatsoeuer, besides all those windowes which I make plaine might be made
bay windowes, either with battlements, or without, but the scope of my
booke tendeth onely to the vse of the honest Husbandman, and not to
instruct men of dignitie, who in Architecture are able wonderfully to
controle me; therefore that the Husbandman may know the vse of this
_facsimile_, he shall vnderstand it by this which followeth.
_A._ Signifieth the great hall.
_B._ The dining Parlor for entertainment of strangers.
_C._ An inward closset within the Parlor for the Mistrisses vse, for
necessaries.
_D._ A strangers lodging within the Parlor.
_E._ A staire-case into the roomes ouer the Parlor.
_F._ A staire-case into the Good-mans roomes ouer the Kitchin and
Buttery.
_G._ The Skreene in the hall.
_H._ An inward cellar within the buttery, which may serue for a Larder.
_I._ The Buttery.
_K._ The Kitchin, in whose range may be placed a bruing lead, and
conuenient Ouens, the bruing vessels adioyning.
_L._ The Dairy house for necessary businesse.
_M._ The Milke house.
_N._ A faire sawne pale before the formost court.
_O._ The great gate to ride in at to the hall dore.
_P._ A place where a Pumpe would be placed to serue the offices of the
house.
{Illustration: This figure signifieth the dores of the house.}
{Illustration: This figure signifieth the windowes of the house.}
{Illustration: This figure signifieth the Chimnies of the house.}
Now you shall further vnderstand that on the South side of your house,
you shall plant your Garden and Orchard, as wel for the prospect thereof
to al your best roomes, as also because your house will be a defence
against the Northerne coldnesse, whereby your fruits will much better
prosper. You shall on the West side of your house, within your inward
dairy and kitchin court, fence in a large base court, in the midst
whereof would be a faire large Pond, well ston'd and grauelled in the
bottome, in which your Cattell may drinke, and horses when necessitie
shall vrge be washt: for I doe by no meanes alow washing of horses after
instant labour. Neere to this Pond you shall build your Doue-coate, for
Pigions delight much in the water: and you shall by no meanes make your
Doue-house too high, for Pigions cannot endure a high mount, but you
shall build it moderately, cleane, neate, and close, with water
pentisses to keepe away vermine. On the North side of your base-court
you shall build your Stables, Oxe-house, Cow-house, and Swine-coates,
the dores and windowes opening all to the South. On the South side of
the base-court, you shall builde your Hay-barnes, Corne-barnes,
pullen-houses for Hennes, Capons, Duckes, and Geese, your french Kilne,
and Malting flowres, with such like necessaries: and ouer crosse betwixt
both these sides, you shall build your bound houels, to cary your Pease,
of good and sufficient timber, vnder which you shall place when they are
out of vse your Cartes, Waynes, Tumbrels, Ploughs, Harrowes, and such
like, together with Plough timber, and axletrees: all which would very
carefully be kept from wet, which of all things doth soonest rot and
consume them. And thus much of the Husbandmans house, and the
necessaries there to belonging.
CHAP. III.
_Of the seuerall parts and members of an ordinarie Plough, and of the
ioyning of them together._
If a workeman of any trade, or mistery, cannot giue directions how, and
in what manner, the tooles where with he worketh should be made or
fashioned, doubtlesse hee shall neuer worke well with them, nor know
when they are in temper and when out. And so it fareth with the
Husbandman, for if hee know not how his Plough should be made, nor the
seuerall members of which it consisteth, with the vertue and vse of
euery member, it is impossible that euer hee should make a good furrow,
or turne ouer his ground in Husbandly manner: Therefore that euery
Husbandman may know how a well shaped Plough is made, he shall
vnderstand that the first member thereof, as being the strongest and
most principallest peece of timber belonging to the same, is called the
Plough-beame, being a large long peece of timber much bending, according
to the forme of this figure.
{Illustration}
This beame hath no certaine length nor thicknesse, but is proportioned
according to the ground, for if it be for a clay ground the length is
almost seauen foote, if for any other mixt or lighter earth, then fiue
or sixe foote is long inough.
The second member or part of the Plough, is called the skeath, and is a
peece of woode of two foote and a halfe in length, and of eight inches
in breadth, and two inches in thicknesse: it is driuen extreamly hard
into the Plough-beame, slopewise, so that ioyned they present this
figure.
{Illustration}
The third part is called the Ploughes principall hale, and doth belong
to the left hand being a long bent peece of woode, some what strong in
the midst, and so slender at the vpper end that a man may easily gripe
it, which being fixed with the rest presenteth this figure.
{Illustration}
The fourth part is the Plough head, which must be fixed with the sheath
& the head all at one instant in two seuerall mortisse holes: it is a
flat peece of timber, almost three foote in length if it be for clay
ground, otherwise shorter, of breadth seauen inches, and of thicknesse
too inches and a halfe, which being ioyned to the rest presenteth this
figure.
{Illustration}
The fift part is the Plough spindels, which are two small round pieces
of woode, which coupleth together the hales, as in this figure.
{Illustration}
The sixt part is the right hand hale, through which the other end of the
spindels runne, and is much slenderer then the left hand hale, for it is
put to no force, but is onely a stay and aide to the Plough houlder when
hee cometh to heauy, stiffe, and strong worke, and being ioyned with the
rest presenteth this figure.
{Illustration}
The seauenth part is the Plough-rest, which is a small peece of woode,
which is fixt at one end in the further nicke of the Plough head, and
the other end to the Ploughs right-hand hale, as you may see by this
figure.
{Illustration}
The eight part is called the shelboard, and is a broad board of more
then an inche thicknesse, which couereth all the right side of the
Plough, and is fastned with two strong pinnes of woode through the
sheath, and the right-hand hale, according to this figure.
{Illustration}
The ninth part is the coulture, which is a long peece of Iron, made
sharpe at the neather end, and also sharpe on one side and being for a
stiffe clay it must be straight without bending, which passeth by a
mortisse-hole through the beame, and to this coulture belongeth an Iron
ring, which windeth about the beame and keepeth it in strength from
breaking as may appeare by this figure.
{Illustration}
The tenth part of a compleate Plough, is the share; which is fixed to
the Plough head, and is that which cutteth and turneth vp the earth: if
it be for a mixt earth then it is made without a wing, or with a very
small one, but if it be for a deepe, or stiffe clay, then it is made
with a large wing, or an outward point, like the figure following.
{Illustration}
The eleuenth part of a perfect Plough is called the Plough foote, and is
through a mortisse-hole fastned at the farre end of all the beame with a
wedge or two, so as the Husbandman may at his discretion set it higher
or lower, at his pleasure: the vse of it is to giue the Plough earth, or
put it from the earth, as you please, for the more you driue it
downeward, the more it raiseth the beame from the ground, and maketh the
Irons forsake the earth, and the more you driue it vpward the more it
letteth downe the beame, and so maketh the Irons bite the sorer; the
figure whereof is this.
{Illustration}
Thus haue you all the parts and members of a Plough, and how they be
knit and ioyned together, wherein I would wish you to obserue to make
your Plough-wright euer rather giue your Plough land then put her from
the land, that is, rather leaning towards the earth and biting sore,
then euer slipping out of the ground: for if it haue two much earth the
Husbandman may help it in the houlding, but if it haue too little, then
of necessitie it must make foule worke: but for as much as the error and
amends lye both in the office of the Plough-wright, I will not trouble
the Husbandman with the reformation thereof.
Now you shall vnderstand that there is one other thing belonging to the
Plough, which albe it be no member thereof, yet is it so necessary that
the Husbandman which liueth in durty and stiffe clayes can neuer goe to
Plough without it, and it is called the Aker-staffe, being a pretty
bigge cudgell, of about a yarde in length, with an Iron spud at the end,
according to this figure:
{Illustration}
This Akerstaffe the Husbandman is euer to carry within his Plough, and
when at any time the Irons, shelboard, or Plough, are choaked with durt,
clay, or filth, which will cling about the ould stubble, then with this
Akerstaffe you shall put the same off (your Plough still going) and so
keepe her cleane and smooth that your worke may lye the handsomer; and
this you must euer doe with your right hand: for the Plough choaketh
euer on the shelboard side, and betweene the Irons. And thus much
touching the perfect Plough, and the members thereof.
CHAP. IIII.
_How the Husbandman shall temper his Plough, and make her fit for his
worke._
A Plough is to a Husbandman like an Instrument in the hand of a
Musition, which if it be out of tune can neuer make good Musicke, and so
if the Plough, being out of order, if the Husbandman haue not the
cunning to temper it and set it in the right way, it is impossible that
euer his labour should come to good end.
It is very necessary then that euery good Husbandman know that a Plough
being perfectly well made, the good order or disorder thereof consisteth
in the placing of the Plough-Irons and the Plough-foote. Know then, that
for the placing of the Irons, the share would be set to looke a little
into the ground: and because you shall not bruise, or turne, the point
thereof, you shall knocke it fast vpon the head, either with a crooked
Rams-horne, or else with some piece of soft Ash woode: and you shall
obserue that it stand plaine, flat, and leuell, without wrying or
turning either vpward or downeward: for if it runne not euen vpon the
earth it will neuer make a good furrow, onely as before I said, the
point must looke a little downeward.
Now, for the coulture, you must place it slopewise through the beame, so
as the point of it and the point of the share may as it were touch the
ground at one instant, yet if the coulture point be a little thought the
longer it shall not be amisse: yet for a more certaine direction and to
try whether your Irons stand true I or no, you shall take a string, and
measure from the mortisse-hole through which the coulture passeth, to
the point of the coulture, and so keeping your vpper hand constant lay
the same length to the of point your share, and if one measure serue
them both right, there being no difference betweene them, then the Irons
stand true for their length, otherwise they stand false.
Now your coulture albe it stand true for the length, yet it may stand
either too much to the land, or too much from the land, either of which
is a great errour, and will keepe the Plough from going true: your
coulture therefore shall haue certaine wedges of ould dry Ash woode,
that is to say, one before the coulture on the vpper side the beame, and
another on the land side, or left side, the coulture on the vpper side
the beame also; then you shall haue another wedge behinde the coulture
vnderneath the beame, and one on the furrow side, or right side, the
beame vnderneath also. Now, if your coulture haue too much land, then
you shall driue in your vpper side wedge and ease the contrary: if it
haue too little land, then you shall contrarily driue in your right side
vnder wedge and ease the other: If your coulture stand too forward, then
you shall driue in your vpper wedge which standeth before the coulture;
and if it stand too backward and too neere your share, then you shall
driue in your vnder wedge which standeth behinde the coulture: if your
coulture standeth awry any way, then are either your side wedges too
small, or else not euen and plaine cut, which faults you must amend, and
then all will be perfect. Now, when your Irons are iust and truely
placed, then you shall driue in euery wedge hard and firme, that no
shaking or other straine may loosen them: as for the Plough foote it
also must haue a wedge or two, which when your Plough goeth right and to
your contentment (for the foote will keepe it from sinking or rising)
then you shall also driue them in hard, that the foote may not stirre
from the true place where you did set it. And that these things when a
man commeth into the field may not be to seeke, it is the office of
euery good Husbandman neuer to goe forth with his Plough but to haue his
Hatchet in a socket, fixt to his Plough beame, and a good piece of hard
wedge woode, in case any of your wedges should shake out and be lost.
{SN: Of holding the Plough.}
When your Plough is thus ordered and tempered in good manner, and made
fit for her worke, it then resteth that you know the skill and
aduantages in holding thereof, which indeed are rules of much
diuersitie, for if it be a stiffe, blacke clay which you Plow, then can
you not Plow too deepe, nor make your furrowes too bigge: if it be a
rich hassell ground, and not much binding, then reasonable furrowes,
laid closse, are the best: but if it be any binding, stony, or sandy
ground, then you cannot make your furrowes too small. As touching the
gouerning of your Plough, if you see shee taketh too much land, then you
shall writh your left hand a little to the left side and raise your
Plough rest somewhat from the ground: if shee taketh too little earth,
then you shall raise vp your left hand, and carry your Plough as in a
direct line: If your Plough-Irons forbeare and will not bite on the
earth at all, then it is a signe that you hang too heauy on the Plough
hales, raising the head of the Plough from the ground, which errour you
must amend, and of the two rather raise it vp behind then before, but to
doe neither is best, for the Plough hale is a thing for the hand to
gouerne, and not to make a leaning stocke of: And thus much touching the
tempring of the Plough and making her fit for worke.
CHAP. V.
_The manner of Plowing the rich, stiffe, blacke Clay, his Earings,
Plough, and other Instruments._
Of all soyles in this our kingdome there is none so rich and fruitfull,
if it be well handled and Husbanded, as is that which we call the
stiffe, blacke, Clay, and indeed is more blacker to looke on then any
other soyle, yet some times it will turne vp very blewish, with many
white vaines in it, which is a very speciall note to know his
fruitfulnesse; for that blewish earth mixt with white is nothing else
but very rich Marle, an earth that in Cheshire, Lanckashire, and many
other countries, serueth to Manure and make fat their barrainest land in
such sort that it will beare Corne seauen yeeres together. This blacke
clay as it is the best soyle, well Husbanded, so it is of all soyles the
worst if it be ill Husbanded: for if it loose but one ardor, or
seasenable Plowing, it will not be recouered in foure yeeres after, but
will naturally of it selfe put forth wilde Oates, Thistels, and all
manner of offensiue weedes, as Cockle, Darnell, and such like: his
labour is strong, heauy, and sore, vnto the cattell that tilleth it, but
to the Husbandman is more easie then any other soyle, for this asketh
but foure times Plowing ouer at the most, where diuers other soyles aske
fiue times, and sixe times, as shalbe shewed hereafter. But to come to
the Plowing of this soyle, I hold it meete to beginne with the beginning
of the yeere, which with Husbandmen is at Plow-day, being euer the first
Munday after the Twelft-day, at which time you shall goe forth with your
draught, & begin to plow your Pease-earth, that is, the earth where you
meane to sow your Pease, or Beanes: for I must giue you to vnderstand,
that these Clayes are euer more naturall for Beanes then Pease, not but
that they will beare both alike, only the Husbandman imployeth them more
for Beanes, because pease & fitches wil grow vpon euery soyle, but
Beanes wil grow no where but on the clayes onely. This Pease-earth is
euer where barley grew the yeere before, & hath the stubble yet
remayning thereon. You shal plow this Pease-earth euer vpward, that is,
you shall beginne on the ridge of the land, & turne all your furrowes
vp, one against another, except your lands lye too high (which seldome
can be seene) and then you shall begin at the furrow, & cast downe your
land.
Now, when you haue plowed all your Pease-ground, you shall let it so
lye, till it haue receiued diuers Frosts, some Raine, and then a fayre
season, which betwixt plow-day and Saint _Valentines_ day you shalbe
sure to inioy: and this is called, _The letting of Land lye to baite_:
for without this rest, and these seasons, it is impossible to make these
Clayes harrow, or yeelde any good mould at all. After your Land hath
receiued his kindely baite, then you shall cast in your seede, of
Beanes, or Pease: but in my conceit, an equall mixture of them is the
best seede of all, for if the one faile, the other will be sure to hit:
and when your land is sowne you shall harrow it with a harrow that hath
woodden teeth.
The next Ardor after this, is the sowing of your Barley in your fallow
field: the next is the fallowing of your ground for Barley the next
yeere: the next Ardor is the Summer-stirring of that which you fallowed:
the next is the foyling of that which you Summer-stirde: and the last is
the Winter rigging of that which you foil'd: of all which Ardors, and
the manner of Plowing them, with their seasons, I haue written
sufficiently in the first Chapter of the next part; where I speake of
simple earths vncompounded.
Now whereas I told you before that these clayes were heauy worke for
your Cattell, it is necessary that I shew you how to ease them, and
which way they may draw to their most aduantage, which onely is by
drawing in beare-geares, an inuention the skilfull Husbandman hath found
out, wherein foure horses shall draw as much as sixe, and sixe as eight,
being geard in any other contrary fashion. Now because the name onely
bettereth not your knowledge, you shall heare behould the figure and
manner thereof.
{Illustration}
Now you shall vnderstand the vse of this Figure by the figures therein
contayned, that is to say, the figure
(1) presenteth the plough-cleuisse, which being ioyned to the
plough-beame, extendeth, with a chaine, vnto the first Toastree: and
touching this Cleuisse, you shall vnderstand, that it must be made with
three nickes in the midst thereof, that if the Plough haue too much land
giuen it in the making, that is, if it turne vp too much land, then the
chaine shall be put in the outwardmost nicke to the land side, that is,
the nicke towards your right hand: but if it take too little land, then
it shall be put in the nicke next the furrow, that is, towards the right
hand: but if it goe euen and well, then you shall keepe it in the middle
nicke, which is the iust guide of true proportion. And thus this
Cleuisse is a helpe for the euill making or going of a plough.
(2) Is the hind-most Toastree, that is, a broad piece of Ash woode,
three inches broad, which going crosse the chaine, hath the Swingletrees
fastned vnto it, by which the horses draw. Now you shall vnderstand that
in this Toastree is great helpe and aduantage: for if the two horses
which draw one against the other, be not of equall strength, but that
the one doth ouer-draw the other, then you shall cause that end of the
Toastree by which the weaker horse drawes, to be longer from the chaine
then the other, by at least halfe a foote, and that shall giue the
weaker horse such an aduantage, that his strength shall counterpoyse
with the stronger horse. Now there be some especiall Husbandmen that
finding this disaduantage in the Toastree, and that by the vncertaine
shortening, and lenthening of the Toastree, they haue sometimes more
disaduantaged the strong horse, then giuen helpe to the weake, therefore
they haue inuented another Toastree, with a double chaine, and a round
ring, which is of that excellent perfection in draught, that if a Foale
draw against an olde horse, yet the Foale shall draw no more then the
abilitie of his owne strength, each taking his worke by himselfe, as if
they drew by single chaines. Now because this Toastree is such a notable
Implement both in Plough, Cart, or Waine, and so worthy to be imitated
of all good husbands, I thinke it not amisse to shew you the figure
thereof.
{Illustration: The Toastree with double chaines.}
(3) The Swingletrees, being pieces of Ash wood cut in proportion
afore-shewed, to which the Treates, by which the horses draw, are
fastned with strong loopes.
(4) The Treates by which the horses draw, being strong cords made of the
best Hempe.
(5) The place betweene the Treats, where the horses must stand.
(6) The Hames, which girt the Collers about, to which the other end of
the Treats are fastned, being compassed pieces of wood, eyther cleane
Ash, or cleane Oake.
(7) The round Withes of wood, or broad thongs of leather, to put about
the horses necke, to beare the maine chayne from the ground, that it
trouble not the horses in their going.
(8) The Single-linckes of Iron, which ioyne the Swingle-trees vnto the
Toastrees.
(9) The Belly-bands, which passe vnder the belly of the horse, and are
made fast to both sides of the Treates, keeping them downe, that when
the horse drawes, his coller may not choake him: being made of good
small line or coard.
(10) The Backe-bands, which going ouer the horses backe, and being made
fast to both sides of the Treates, doe hold them, so as when the horses
turne, the Treates doe not fall vnder their feete.
{SN: How many beasts in a plough.}
Thus I haue giuen you the perfect portraiture of a well yoakt Plough,
together with his Implements, and the vse of them, being the best which
hath yet beene found out by any of our skilfullest English Husbandmen,
whose practise hath beene vpon these deepe, stiffe, blacke clayes. Now
you shall vnderstand, that for the number of Cattell to be vsed in these
ploughes, that in fallowing your land, and plowing your Pease-earth,
eight good Cattell are the best number, as being the strongest, and
within the compasse of gouernment, whereas more were but troublesome,
and in all your other Ardors, sixe good beasts are sufficient, yet if it
be so, that eyther want of abilitie, or other necessity vrge, you shall
know that sixe beasts will suffice eyther to fallow, or to plow
Pease-earth, and foure beasts for euery other Ardor or earing: and lesse
then this number is most insufficient, as appeares by daily experience,
when poore men kill their Cattell onely by putting them to ouer-much
labour. And thus much touching the plowing of the blacke clay.
CHAP. VI.
_The manner of plowing the white or gray Clay, his Earings, Plough, and
Instruments._
Now as touching the white or gray clay, you shall vnderstand that it is
of diuers and sundry natures, altering according to his tempers of wet
or drynesse: the wet being more tough, and the dry more brittle: his
mixture and other characters I haue shewed in a former Chapter,
wherefore for his manner of plowing (obseruing my first methode, which
is to beginne with the beginning of the yeere, I meane at Christmas) it
is thus:
{SN: Of sowing of Pease and Beanes.}
If you finde that any of this white or gray clay, lying wet, haue lesse
mixture of stone or chaulke in it, and so consequently be more tough, as
it doth many times fall out, and that vpon such land, that yeere, you
are to sow your Pease and Beanes: for as in the former blacke clay, so
in this gray clay you shall begin with your Pease-earth euer: then
immediately after Plow-day, you shall plow vp such ground as you finde
so tough, in the selfe-same manner as you did plow the blacke clay, and
so let it lye to baite till the frost haue seasoned it, and then sow it
accordingly. But if you haue no such tough land, but that it holdes it
owne proper nature, being so mixt with small stones and chaulke, that it
will breake in reasonable manner, then you shall stay till the latter
end of Ianuary, at what time, if the weather be seasonable, and
inclining to drynesse, you shall beginne to plow your Pease-earth, in
this manner: First, you shall cause your seedes-man to sow the land with
single casts, as was shewed vpon the blacke clay, with this caution,
that the greater your seede is, (that is, the more Beanes you sow) the
greater must be your quantitie: and being sowne, you shall bring your
plough, and beginning at the furrow of the land, you shall plow euery
furrow downeward vpon the Pease and Beanes: which is called sowing of
Pease vnder furrow: and in this manner you shall sow all your Pease and
Beanes, which is cleane contrary to your blacke clay. Besides, whereas
vpon the stiffe clay it is conuenient to take as large furrowes as you
please, vpon this kinde of gray clay you shall take as small furrowes as
is possible. Now the reason for this manner of plowing your Pease-earth,
is, because it is a light kinde of breaking earth, so that should it be
sowne according to the stiffe blacke clay, it would neuer couer your
Pease, but leaue them bare, both to be destroyed by the Fowles of the
ayre, and the bitternesse of the weather. As soone as your Pease and
Beanes are risen a fingers length aboue the earth, then if you finde
that any of your lands doe lye very rough, and that the clods be great,
it shall not be amisse, to take a payre of woodden Harrowes, and harrow
ouer all your rough lands, the benefit whereof is this, that it will
both breake the hard clots, and so giue those Pease leaue to sprout
through the earth, which before lay bound in and drowned, and also lay
your lands smooth and cleane, that the Mowers when they come to mowe
your Pease and Beanes, shall haue better worke, and mowe them with more
ease, and much better to the owners profit. For you must vnderstand that
where you sow Beanes, there it is euer more profit to mowe them with
Sythes, then to reape them with Hookes, and much sooner, and with lesse
charge performed. The limitation of time for this Ardor of earing, is
from the latter end of Ianuary vntill the beginning of March, not
forgetting this rule, that to sow your Pease and Beanes in a shower, so
it be no beating raine is most profitable: because they, as Wheat, take
delight in a fresh and a moyst mould.
{SN: Of sowing of Barley.}
After the beginning of March, you shall beginne to sow your Barley vpon
that ground which the yeere before did lye fallow, and is commonly
called your tilth, or fallow field: and if any part of it consist of
stiffe and tough ground, then you shall, vpon such ground, sow your
Barley vnder furrow, in such manner and fashion as I described vnto you
for the sowing of your stiffe blacke clay: but if it be (as for the most
part these gray and white clayes are) of a much lighter, and as it were,
fussie temper, then you shall first plow your land vpward, cleane and
well, without baukes or stiches: and hauing so plowed it, you shall then
sow it with Barley, that is to say, with double casts, I meane,
bestowing twise so many casts of Barley, as you would doe if you were to
sow it with Pease. And as soone as you haue sowne your Barley, you shall
take a payre of woodden Harrowes, and harrow it as small as is possible:
and this is called sowing aboue furrow.
{SN: Of sowing Oates.}
Now if you haue any land, which eyther through the badnesse of the
soyle, or for want of manure, is more barrayne, and hard to bring forth
then generally the rest of your land is, then you shall not bestow
Barley thereupon, but sow it with Oates, in such manner and fashion as
is appointed for the sowing of Pease, that is to say, if it be stiffe
ground you shall sow it aboue furrow, if it be light ground, then you
shall sow it vnder furrow, knowing this for a rule, that the barraynest
ground will euer beare indifferent Oates, but if the ground haue any
small hart, then it will beare Oates in great abundance: neither neede
you to be very precise for the oft plowing of your ground before you sow
your Oates, because Oates will grow very well if they be sowne vpon
reasonable ground, at the first plowing: whence it comes to passe that
many Husbandmen doe oft sow their Oates where they should sow their
Pease, and in the same manner as they doe sow their Pease, and it is
held for a rule of good husbandry also: because if the ground be held
any thing casuall for Pease, it is better to haue good Oates then
naughty Pease: besides, your Oates are both a necessary graine in the
house, as for Oate-meale, for the pot, for Puddings, and such like, and
also for the stable, for Prouender, and the feeding of all manner of
Poultry. The time for sowing of your Barley and Oates, is from from the
first of March till the first of Aprill, obseruing euer to sow your
Oates first, and your Barley after, for it being onely a Summer graine,
would participate as little as may be with any part of the Winter.
{SN: Of Fallowing.}
{SN: Of sleighting Barley.}
About the middest of Aprill you shall beginne to fallow that part of
your ground, which you entend shall take rest that yeere, and so become
your fallow or tilth-field. And in fallowing this gray or white clay,
you shall obserue all those rules and ceremonies, which are formerly
described for the fallowing of the stiffe blacke clay, knowing that
there is in this worke no difference betweene the blacke clay, and the
gray clay, but both to be plowed after one manner, that is to say, to
haue all the furrowes cast downeward, and the ridges of the lands laid
largely open, and of a good depth, onely the furrowes which you turne
vpon this gray clay must be much smaller and lesse then those which you
turne vpon your stiffe blacke clay, because this earth is more naturally
inclined to binde and cleaue together then that of the blacke clay. The
time for fallowing of this ground, is from the middest of Aprill vntill
the middest of May: at what time you shall perceiue your Barley to
appeare aboue the ground, so that then you shall beginne to sleight and
smooth it: but not with backe Harrowes, as was described for the blacke
clay, because this gray clay being not so fat and rich, but more
inclined to fastnesse and hardnesse, therefore it will not sunder and
breake so easily as the other: wherefore when you will smooth or sleight
this ground, you shall take a round piece of wood, being in compasse
about at least thirty inches, and in length sixe foote, hauing at each
end a strong pinne of Iron, to which making fast two small poales, by
which the horse shall draw, yet in such sort that the round piece of
wood may roule and turne about as the horse drawes it: and with this you
shall roule ouer all your Barley, and by the waight of the round piece
of wood bruise and breake all the hard clots asunder. This is called
amongst Husbandmen a Rouler, and is for this purpose of sleighting and
smoothing of grounds of great vse and profit. Now you shall vnderstand
that you must not at any time sleight or smooth your Corne, but after a
shower of Raine, for if the mould be not a little moistned the rouler
will not haue power to breake it.
Now for as much as this rouler is of so good vse and yet not generally
vsed in this kingdome, I thinke it not amisse to shew you the figure
thereof.
{Illustration: The great Rouler.}
As soone as you haue roulled ouer your Barley, & laid it so smooth as
you can with your rouler, if then you perceiue any hard clots, such as
the rouler cannot breake, then you shal send forth your seruants with
long clotting beetels, made broad and flat, and with them you shall
breake asunder all those hard clots, and so lay your Barley as smooth
and cleane as is possible: the profit whereof you shall both finde in
the multiplying of your Corne and also in the sauing of your sithes
from breaking, at such time as you shall come to mowe your Corne, and
gather in your Haruest.
{SN: Of Summer-stirring.}
{SN: Of weeding.}
{SN: Of stone gathering.}
Your Barley being thus laide smooth, you shall then follow your other
necessary businesses, as preparing of your fewell, and other needements
for houshould, vntill the beginning of Iune, at which time you shall
beginne to Summer-stirre your fallow field, which shalbe done in all
points after the same manner as you did Summer-stirre your blacke Clay,
that is to say, you shall beginne in the ridge of the land, and as when
you fallowed your land you turned your furrowes downeward, so now in
Summer-stirring, you shall turne your furrowes vpward and close the
ridge of you land againe. As soone as this Ardor is finished, or when
the vnseasonablenesse of the weather, as either too much wet, or too
much drynesse shall hinder you from Plowing, you shall then looke into
your Cornefields, that is to say: first into your Wheate and Rye field,
and if there you shall finde any store of weedes, as Thistell, Darnell,
Tare-Cockle, or such like, you shall with weede-hookes, or nippers of
woode, cut, or plucke them vp by the rootes; and also if you finde any
annoyance of stones, which hinders the growth of your Corne, as
generally it happens in this soyle, you shall then cause some Boyes and
Girles, or other waste persons, to gather them vp and lay them in heapes
at the lands ends, to be imployed either about the mending of high wayes
or other occasions, and for this purpose their is a generall custome in
most Villages, that euery houshoulder is bound to send out one seruant
to be imployed about this businesse: whence it comes to passe, that it
is called common worke, as being done at the generall charge of the
whole Parish. After you haue weeded your Wheate and Rye, you shall then
weede your Barley also, which being finished about the midst of Iuly,
you shall then beginne to looke into your medowes and to the preparing
of your Hay haruest.
{SN: Of foyling.}
Now at such time as either the vnseasonablenesse of the weather, or the
growth of your grasse shall hinder you from following that businesse of
Haruest, you shall then looke into your fallow or tilth field againe,
and whereas before at your Summer-stirring you Plowed your land vpward,
now you shall beginne to foile, that is to say, you shall cast your land
downe againe, and open the ridge: and this Ardor of all other Ardors you
must by no meanes neglect vpon the gray, white clay, because it being
most subiect vnto weede, and the hardest to bring to a fine mould, this
Ardor of all others, doth both consume the one and makes perfect the
other, and the drier season you doe foile your land in, the better it
is, and the more it doth breake and sunder the clots in pieces: for as
in Summer-stirring the greater clots you raise vp, and the rougher your
land lies the better it is, because it is a token of great store of
mould, so when you foile, the more you breake the clots in pieces the
better season will your land take, and the richer it wilbe when the
seede is sowne into it: And the season for the foiling of this soile is
from the midst of Iuly till the midst of September.
{SN: Of Manuring.}
Now albe I haue omitted the Manuring of this land in his due place, as
namely, from the midst of Aprill, till the end of May, yet you shall
vnderstand that of all other things it is not in any wise to be
neglected by the carefull Husbandman, both because the soyle being not
so rich as the blacke Clay, will very hardly bring forth his seede
without Manure, and also because it is for the most part subiect vnto
much wet, and stones, both which are signes of cold and barrainenesse.
Now for those Manures, which are best and most proper for this soile,
you shall vnderstand that all those which I formerlie described for the
blacke Claies, as namely, Oxe or Cowes dung, Horse dung and Sheepes
dung, are also very good for this soile, and to be vsed in the same
manner as is specified in the former Chapter: but if you haue not such
store of this Manure as will serue to compasse your whole land, you
shall then vnderstand, that the blacke mud, or durt which lies in the
bottome of olde ponds, or else standing lakes, is also a very good
manure for this soile, or else straw which is spread in high-wayes, and
so rotted by the great concourse or vse of much trauelling, and after in
the Spring-time shouelled vp in great heapes, is a good manure for this
earth: but if you finde this soile to be subiect to extraordinary wet
and coldnesse, you shall then know that the ashes eyther of wood, coale,
or straw, is a very good manure for it. But aboue all other, and then
which there is no manure more excellent for cold barraine clayes of this
nature, the Pigions dung, or the dung of houshold Pullen, as Capons,
Hennes, Chickens, Turkies, and such like, so there be no Goose-dung
amongst it, is the best of all other: but not to be vsed in such sort as
the other manures, that is to say, to be laid in great heapes vpon the
land, or to be spread from the Cart vpon the land, for neyther is there
such abundance of such manure to be gotten, nor if there were, it would
not be held for good husbandrie to make lauish hauocke of a thing so
precious.
{SN: The vse of Pigion or Pullen-dung.}
You shall then know that for the vse of Pigion or Pullen-dung, it is
thus: you shall first with your hand breake it as small as may be, and
then put it into the Hopper, in such sort as you put your corne when you
sow it: and then looke how you sow your corne, in such sort you shall
sow your Pigion or Pullen-dung: which done, you shall immediately put
your Barley into the same Hopper, and so sow it after the Pigions or
Pullen-dung: by which you are to vnderstand that this kinde of manuring
is to be vsed onely in Seede-time, and at no other season. This manure
is of the same nature that sheepes manure is, and doth last but onely
for one yeere, onely it is much hotter, as being in the greatest
extremitie of heate. Now if it happen that you cannot get any of this
Pigions or Pullen-dung, because it is scarce, and not in euery mans
power, if then you take Lime and sow it vpon your land in such sort as
is before said of the Pigions-dung, and then sow your corne after it,
you shall finde great profit to come thereon, especially in colde wet
soiles, such as for the most part, these gray white clayes are.
{SN: Of sowing Wheate.}
After your land is foild, which worke would be finished by the middest
of September, then you shall beginne to sow your Wheate, Rye, and
Maslin, which in all things must be done as is before set downe for the
blacke clay, the choice of seede, and euery obseruation being all one:
for Wheate not taking delight in a very rich ground, doth prosper best
vpon this indifferent soile. Whence it comes that in these gray white
clayes, you shall for the most part, see more Wheate sowne then any
other Graine whatsoeuer. But as touching your Rye and Maslin, that euer
desires a rich ground and a fine mould, and therefore you shall make
choise of your better earth for that Seede, and also obserue to helpe it
with manure, or else sheepes folding, in such manner as is described in
the former Chapter, where I spake of the sowing of Wheate, Rye, and
Maslin.
{SN: Of winter-ridging.}
As soone as you haue sowne your Wheate, Rye, and Maslin, you shall then
about the latter end of October, beginne to Winter ridge, or set vp your
land for the whole yeere: which you shall doe in all points, as you doe
vpon the blacke clay, without any change or alteration. And the
limitation for this Ardor is, from the latter end of October vntill the
beginning of December, wherein your yeeres worke is made perfect and
compleate.
{SN: Obseruations.}
Now you shall vnderstand, that although I haue in this generall sort
passed ouer the Ardors and seuerall Earings of this white or gray clay,
any of which are in no wise to be neglected: yet there are sundry other
obseruations to be held of the carefull Husbandman, especially in the
laying of his land: as thus, if the soile be of good temper, fruitfull,
drie, and of a well mixed mould, not being subiect to any naturall
spring or casting forth of moisture, but rather through the natiue
warmth drying vp all kinde of fluxes or colde moistures, neyther binding
or strangling the Seede, nor yet holding it in such loosenesse, that it
loose his force of increasing, in this case it is best to lay your
lands flat and leuell, without ridges or furrowes, as is done in many
parts of Cambridge-shire, some parts of Essex, and some parts of
Hartford-shire: but if the clay be fruitfull and of good temper, yet
either by the bordering of great hils, the ouer-flow of small brookes,
or some other casuall meanes it is subiect to much wet or drowning, in
this case you shall lay your lands large and high, with high ridges and
deepe furrowes, as generally you see in Lincolne-shire,
Nottingham-shire, Huntington-shire, and most of the middle Shires in
England. But if the land be barraine, colde, wet, subiect to much
binding, and doth bring forth great store of weedes, then you shall lay
your land in little stiches, that is to say, not aboue three or foure
furrowes at the most together, as is generally seene in Middlesex,
Hartford-shire, Kent and Surrey: for by that meanes neither shall the
land binde and choake the Corne, nor shall the weede so ouer-runne it,
but that the Husbandman may with good ease helpe to strengthen and
clense it, the many furrowes both giuing him many passages, whereby he
may correct those enormities, and also in such sort conuaying away the
water and other moistures, that there cannot be made any land more
fruitfull.
{SN: Of the Plough.}
Now to speake of the Plough which is best and most proper for this gray
or white clay, of which we now speake, you shall vnderstand that it
differeth exceeding much from that of which we spake concerning the
blacke clay: I, and in such sort, that there is but small alliance or
affinitie betweene them: as thus for example:
First, it is not so large and great as that for the blacke clay: for the
head thereof is not aboue twentie inches in length, and not aboue one
inch and a halfe in thicknesse, the maine beame thereof is not aboue
fiue foot long, & the rest is broader by an inch and more then that for
the blacke clay: this Plough also hath but one hale, & that is onely the
left hand Hale: for the Plough-staffe, or Aker-staffe serueth euer in
stead of the right hand Hale, so that the Rough-staues are fixed, the
vpper vnto the shelboard, and the neather vnto the Plough-rest, as for
your better vnderstanding you may perceiue by this figure.
{Illustration: The Plough with one Hale.}
Now you shall vnderstand that the especiall care which is to be held in
the making of this Plough, is, that it be wide and open in the hinder
part, that it may turne and lay the furrowes one vpon another: whereas
if it should be any thing straitned in the hinder part, considering that
this clay naturally is somewhat brittle of it selfe, and that the
furrowes which you plow must of necessitie be very narrow and little, it
were not possible so to lay them, but that they would fall downe backe
againe, and inforce the Plow-man to lose his labour. Also you shall
vnderstand that whereas in the former plough, which is for the blacke
clay, you may turne the shelboard, that is, when the one end is worne,
you may eftsoones turne the other, and make it serue the like season: in
this Plough you must neuer turne the shelboard, because the rising wing
of the Share will so defend it, that it will euer last as long as the
Plough-head, without change or turning.
Now for the Irons belonging vnto this Plough, which is the Share and
Coulture, there is more difference in them then in the Plough: for to
speake first of the Share, whereas the former Share for the blacke clay,
was made broad, plaine, and with a large wing, this Share must be made
narrow, sharpe, and small, with no wing at all, hauing from the vpper
part thereof, close by the shelboard, a certaine rising wing, or broad
piece of Iron, which comming vp and arming that part of the shelboard
which turnes ouer the land, defends the wood from the sharpe mould,
which hauing the mixture of pible stone in it, would otherwise in lesse
then one dayes worke consume the shelboard vnto nothing, forcing the
Plow-man to much trouble and double cost. The fashion of the Share is
presented in this Figure following.
{Illustration: The Share.}
This Share is onely made that it may take a small furrow, and so by
breaking the earth oftner then any other Share, causeth the land to
yeeld a good and plentifull mould, and also keepe it from binding or
choaking the seede when it is cast into it.
Now for the Coulture, it differeth from the former Coulture both in
breadth and thicknesse, but especially in compasse: for whereas the
former Coulture for the blacke clay, was made straight, narrow, and
thicke, this must be compassed like an halfe bent bow: it must be
broader then three fingers, and thinner then halfe an inche, according
to this Figure.
{Illustration: The Coulture.}
Now when these Irons, the Shelboard, and other implements are fixed vnto
the Plough, you shall perceiue that the Plough will carry the proportion
of this Figure following.
{Illustration: The Plough for the gray Clay.}
Hauing thus shewed you the substance, difference, and contraries of
these two Ploughs, which belong to these two seuerall clayes, the blacke
and gray, you shall vnderstand that there is no clay-ground whatsoeuer,
which is without other mixture, but one of these Ploughs will
sufficiently serue to eare and order it: for all clayes are of one of
these tempers.
{SN: The vse and handling.}
Now for the vse and manner of handling or holding this Plough, it
differeth nothing in particular obseruation from the vse and handling
of the Plough formerly described, more then in the largenesse and
smalnesse of the furrowes: for as before I said, whereas the blacke clay
must be raised with a great furrow, and a broad stitch, this gray clay
must be raised with a small furrow, and a narrow stitch: and although
this plough haue nothing but a left hand Hale, yet considering the
Plough-staffe, vpon which the Plow-man resteth his right hand, it is all
one as if he had a right. And indeede, to make your knowledge the more
perfect, you shall know that these gray clayes are generally in their
owne natures so wet, tough, and slimy, and doe so clogge, cleaue, and
choake vp the Plough, that hee which holds it shall haue enough to doe
with his right hand onely to clense and keepe the Plough from choaking,
insomuch that if there were another Hale, yet the Plow-man should haue
no leasure to hold it.
{SN: Of the draught or Teame.}
Now for the Draught or Teame which should draw this Plough, they ought
in all points, as well in strength as tryuing to be the same with those
before shewed for the vse of the blacke clay: as namely, eyther Oxen or
Horse, or Horse and Oxen mixt together, according to the custome of the
soile wherein the Plow-man liues, or his abilitie in prouision,
obseruing euer to keepe his number of beasts for his Plough certaine,
that is to say, for fallowing, and Pease-earth, neuer vnder sixe, and
for all other Ardors foure at the least. And thus much for the plowing
of this gray or white clay.
CHAP. VII.
_The manner of plowing the red-Sand, his Earings, Plough, and Implements._
Next vnto these Clayes, which are soiles simple and vncompound, as being
perfect in their owne natures, without the helpe of other mixtures, I
place the Sand soiles, as being of like qualitie, not borrowing any
thing but from their owne natures, nor breeding any defects more then
their owne naturall imperfections: and of Sands, sith the red Sand is
the best and most fruitfull, therefore it is fit that it take prioritie
of place, and be here first spoken of.
You shall then vnderstand that this red Sand, albeit it is the best of
Sands, yet it is the worst of many soiles, as being of it selfe of such
a hot and drie nature, that it scorcheth the seede, and dryeth vp that
nutriment and fatnesse which should occasion increase: whereby it comes
to passe, that the Barley which growes vpon this red Sand is euer more
yealow, leane and withered, then that which growes vpon the clayes or
other mixt earths. This Sand especially taketh delight in Rye, because
it is a Graine which loues warmth aboue all other, and yet
notwithstanding, if it be well ordered, manured and plowed, it will
bring forth good store of Barley, albeit the Barley be not so good as
Clay-Barley, either for the colour, or for the yeeld, whether it be in
meale or in Malt.
{SN: Of Fallowing.}
Now for the manner of Earing or plowing this redde Sand, it differeth
much from both the former soyles, insomuch that for your better
vnderstanding, I must in many places alter my former methode, yet so
little as may be, because I am loath to alter or clogge the memory of
the Reader: wherefore to pursue my purpose. As soone as Christmas is
ended, that is to say, about the middest of Ianuary, you shall goe with
your Plough into that field where the Haruest before did grow your Rye,
and there you shall in your plowing cast your lands downe-ward, and open
the ridges well, for this yeere it must be your fallow field: for as in
the former soiles, wee did diuide the fields either into three parts,
that is, one for Barley and Wheate, another for Pease, and the third
fallow, which is the best diuision: or into foure parts, that is, one
for Wheate and Rye, another for Barley, a third for Pease, and a fourth
fallow, which is the worst diuision and most toilesome, so in this red
Sand soile, we must euer diuide it into three parts, that is, one for
Barley, another for Rye, and a third fallow. For this Sand-soile being
hot, drie, and light, will neither bring forth good Beanes nor good
Pease, and therefore that Ardor is in this place but onely to be spoke
of by way of discourse in vrgent necessitie.
Wherefore (as before I said) about the middest of Ianuary you shall
beginne to lay fallow that field, where formerly did grow your Rye, the
manner of plowing whereof differeth nothing from the manner of plowing
the clayes before written of, onely that the discretion of the Plow-man
must thus farre forth gouerne him, that in as much as this soile is
lighter, dryer, and of a more loose temper, by so much the more he must
be carefull to make his furrowes lesse, and to lay them the closer
together: & also in as much as this soile, through his naturall warmth
and temperate moisture, is exceeding apt to bring forth much weede,
especially Brakes, Ling, Brambles, and such like, therefore the Plow-man
shall be very carefull to plow all his furrowes very cleane, without
baukes or other impediments by which may be ingendred any of these
inconueniences.
{SN: Of Spring-foyling.}
After you haue thus broke vp and fallowed your fallow or tilth-field,
the limitation of which time is from the middest of Ianuary vntill the
middest of February, you shall then at the middest of February, when the
clay-men begin to sow their Beanes and Pease, goe with your plough into
your other fallow-field, which all the yeere before hath laine fallow
and already receiued at your hands at least foure seuerall Ardors; as
Fallowing, Summer-stirring, Foyling, and Winter-rigging; and there you
shall plow all that field ouer the fift time, which is called the
Spring-foyling: and in this Ardor you shall plow all your lands vpward,
in such sort as when you Winter-ridge it, by which meanes you shall plow
vp all those weedes which haue sprung forth in the Winter season. For
you must vnderstand that in these light, hot, sandy soiles, there is a
continuall spring (though not of good fruits) yet of weeds, quicks, and
other inconueniences: for it is a rule amongst Husbandmen, that warme
soiles are neuer idle, that is, they are euer bringing forth something.
{SN: Of Sowing March-Rye.}
Now the limitation for this Ardor is from the middest of Februarie
vntill the middest of March, at which time you shall, by comparing
former experience with your present iudgement, take into your
consideration the state, goodnesse, and powerfulnesse of your land, I
meane especially of this fallow-field, which hath laine fallow the yeere
before, and hath now receiued fiue Ardors: and if you finde any part of
it, either for want of good ordoring in former times, or for want of
manure in the present yeere, to be growne so leane and out of hart, that
you feare it hath not strength enough to beare Barley, you shall then at
this time, being the middest of March, sow such land with Rye, which of
Husbandmen is called the sowing of March-Rye: and this Rye is to be
sowne and harrowed in such sort as you did sow it vpon the clay soiles,
that is to say, aboue furrow, and not vnder furrow, except the land be
very full of quickes, that is, of Brakes, Ling, Brambles, Dockes, or
such like, and then you shall first with a paire of Iron harrowes, that
is, with harrowes that haue Iron teeth, first of all harrow the land
ouer, and by that meanes teare vp by the rootes all those quickes, and
so bring them from the land: which done, you shall sow the land ouer
with Rye, and then plow it downeward which is vnder furrow: & as soone
as it is plowed, you shall then with a paire of Iron Harrowes harrow it
all ouer so exceedingly, that the mould may be made as fine, and the
land lie as smooth as is possible.
{SN: Of the harrow.}
Now because I haue in the former Chapters spoke of Harrowes and
harrowing, yet haue not deliuered vnto you the shape and proportion
thereof, and because both the woodden harrow and the Iron harrow haue
all one shape, and differ in nothing but the teeth onely, I thinke it
not amisse before I proceede any further to shew you in this Figure the
true shape of a right Harrow.
{Illustration: The Harrow.}
The parts of this Harrow consisteth of buls, staues, and teeth: of buls,
which are broad thicke pieces eyther of well seasoned Willow, or Sallow,
being at least three inches euery way square, into which are fastned the
teeth: of staues, which are round pieces of well seasoned Ash, being
about two inches and a halfe about, which going thorow the buls, holde
the buls firmely in equall distance one from the other: and of teeth,
which are either long pinnes of wood or Iron, being at least fiue
inches in length, which are made fast, and set slope-wise through the
buls.
{SN: The diuersitie of Harrowes.}
Now you shall vnderstand that Harrowes are of two kindes, that is,
single and double: the single Harrow is called of Husbandmen the
Horse-harrow, and is not aboue foure foote square: the double Harrow is
called the Oxe-harrow, and it must be at least seauen foote square, and
the teeth must euer be of Iron. Now whereas I spake of the Horse-harrow
and the Oxe-harrow, it is to be vnderstood that the single Harrow doth
belong to the Horse, because Horses drawing single, doe draw each a
seuerall Harrow by himselfe, albeit in the common vse of harrowing, we
couple two horses euer together, and so make them draw two single
Harrowes: but Oxen not being in good Husbandry to be separated, because
euer two must draw in one yoake, therefore was the double Harrow
deuised, containing in substance and worke as much as two single
Harrowes.
{SN: The vse of Harrowes.}
Now for the vse of Harrowes. The woodden Harrow which is the Harrow with
woodden teeth, is euer to be vsed vpon clay grounds and light grounds,
which through drynesse doth grow loose, and fals to mould of it owne
nature, as most commonly Sand grounds doe also: and the Iron Harrow
which is the Harrow with Iron teeth, is euer to be vsed vpon binding
grounds, such as through drynesse grow so hard that they will not be
sundered, and through wet turne soone to mire and loose durt. Now
whereas there be mingled earths, which neither willingly yeeld to mould,
nor yet bindes so sore, but small industry breaks it, of which earth I
shall speake hereafter, to such grounds the best Husbands vse a mixture,
that is to say, one woodden Harrow, and one Iron Harrow, that the
woodden Harrow turning ouer and loosening the loosest mould, the Iron
Harrow comming after, may breake the stiffer clots, and so consequently
turne all the earth to a fine mould. And thus much for Harrowes.
{SN: Of the sowing of Pulse.}
{SN: Of Pease, Lentles, and Lupines.}
Now to returne to my former purpose touching the tillage of this red
Sand: if (as before I said) you finde any part of your fallow-field too
weake to beare Barley, then is your March-Rye, a graine which will take
vpon a harder earth: but if the ground be too weake either for Barley or
Rye, (for both those Seedes desire some fatnesse of ground) then shall
you spare plowing it at all vntill this time of the yeere, which is
mid-March, and then you shall plow it, and sow it with either the
smallest Pease you can get, or else with our true English Fitches, which
by forraine Authors are called _Lentles_, that is, white Fitches, or
_Lupines_, which are red Fitches: for all these three sorts of Pulse
will grow vpon very barraine soiles, and in their growth doe manure and
make rich the ground: yet your Pease desire some hart of ground, your
_Lentles_, or white Fitches, lesse, and your _Lupines_, or red Fitches,
the least of all, as being apt to grow vpon the barrainest soile: so
likewise your Pease doe manure barraine ground well, your _Lentles_
better and your _Lupines_ the best of all.
Now for the nature and vse of these graines, the Pease as all Husbandmen
know, are both good for the vse of man in his bread, as are vsed in
Leicester-shire, Lincolne-shire, Nottingham-shire, and many other
Countries: and also for Horses in their Prouender, as is vsed generally
ouer all England: for _Lentles_, or white Fitches, or the _Lupines_
which are redde Fitches, they are both indifferent good in bread for
man, especially if the meale be well scalded before it be knodden (for
otherwise the sauour is exceeding rancke) or else they are a very good
foode being sodden in the manner of Leaps-Pease, especially at Sea, in
long iourneyes where fresh meate is most exceeding scarce: so that
rather then your land should lye idle, and bring forth no profit, I
conclude it best to sow these Pulses, which both bring forth commoditie,
and also out of their owne natures doe manure and inrich your ground,
making it more apt and fit to receiue much better Seede.
For the manner of sowing these three sorts of Pulse: you shall sow them
euer vnder furrow, in such sort as is described for the sowing of Pease
and Beanes vpon the white or gray clay which is of indifferent drinesse
and apt to breake.
{SN: Of Manuring.}
Now the limitation for this Ardor or seede time, is from the middest of
March, till the middest of Aprill: then from the middest of Aprill, till
the middest of May, you shall make your especiall worke, to be onely the
leading forth of your Manure to that field which you did fallow, or lay
tilth that present yeere immediatelie after Christmas, and of which I
first spake in this Chapter. And herein is to be vnderstood, that the
best and principallest Manure for this redde-sand, is the ouldest Manure
of beasts which can be-gotten, which you shall know by the exceeding
blacknesse and rottennesse thereof, being in the cutting both soft and
smooth, all of one substance, as if it were well compact morter, without
any shew of straw or other stuffe which is vnrotted, for this dung is of
all the fattest and coolest, and doth best agree with the nature of this
hot sand. Next to the dung of beasts, is the dung of Horses if it be old
also, otherwise it is somewhat of the hottest, the rubbish of old
houses, or the sweepings of flowres, or the scowrings of old Fish-ponds,
or other standing waters where beasts and horses are vsed to drinke, or
be washt, or wherevnto the water and moisture of dunghills haue recourse
are all good Manures for this redde-sand: as for the Manure of Sheepe
vpon this redde-sand, it is the best of all in such places as you meane
to sow Rie, but not fully so good where you doe intend to sow your
Barley: if it be a cold moist redde-sand (which is seldome found but in
some particular low countries) then it doth not amisse to Manure it most
with Sheepe, or else with Chaulke, Lime, or Ashes, of which you can get
the greatest plentie: if this soile be subiect to much weede and
quickes, as generally it is, then after you haue torne vp the weedes and
quickes with Harrowes, you shall with rakes, rake them together, and
laying them in heapes vpon the land, you shall burne them and then
spreading the ashes they will be a very good Manure, and in short space
destroy the weedes also; likewise if your land be much ouergrowne with
weedes, if when you sheare your Rie you leaue a good long stubble, and
then mowing the stubble burne it vpon the land, it is both a good Manure
and also a good meanes to destroy the weedes.
{SN: Of sowing Barley.}
After your Manure is lead forth and either spread vpon the lands, or set
in great heapes, so as the land may be couered ouer with Manure (for it
is to be obserued that this soile must be throughly Manured) then about
the middest of May, which is the time when this worke should be
finished, you shall repaire with your Plough into the other fallow
field, which was prepared the yeere before for this yeeres Barley, &
there you shall sow it all ouer with Barley aboue furrow, that is to
say, you shall first Plough it, then sow it, and after Harrow it, making
the mould as fine and smooth as may be, which is done with easie labour,
because this sand of it owne nature is as fine as ashes.
{SN: Of sleighting.}
Now the limitation for this seede time, is from the middest of May, till
the middest of Iune, wherein if any man demand why it should not be
sowne in March and Aprill, according as it is sowne in the former
soiles, I answere, that first this redde-sand cannot be prepared, or
receiue his full season in weather, and earings, before this time of the
yeere, and next that these redde-sands, by how much they are hotter and
drier then the other claies, by so much they may wel stay the longer
before they receiue their seede, because that so much the sooner the
seede doth sprout in them, & also the sooner ripen being kept warmer at
the roote then in any could soile whatsoeuer. As soone as the middest of
Iune approacheth, you shall then beginne to Summer-stirre your fallow
field, and to turne your Manure into your land, in such sort as you did
vpon your clay soiles, for this Ardor of Summer-stirring altereth in no
soile, and this must be done from the middest of Iune, till the middest
of Iuly, for as touching sleighting, clotting, or smoothing of this
Barley field, it is seldome in vse, because the finenesse of the sand
will lay the land smooth inough without sleighting: yet if you finde
that any particular land lieth more rough then the rest, it shall not be
amisse, if with your backe Harrowes you smooth it a little within a day
or two after it is sowne.
{SN: Of Foiling.}
{SN: Of sowing Rye.}
From the middest of Iuly vntill the middest of August, you shall foile
and throw downe your fallow field againe, if your lands lie well and in
good order, but if any of your lands doe lie in the danger of water, or
by vse of Plowing are growne too flat, both which are hinderances to the
growth of Corne, then when you foile your lands you shall Plow them
vpward, and so by that meanes raise the ridges one furrow higher. After
you haue foiled your land, which must be about the middest of August,
then will your Barley be ready to mowe, for these hot soiles haue euer
an earely haruest, which as soone as it is mowne and carried into the
Barne, forthwith you shall with all expedition carry forth such Manure
as you may conueniently spare, and lay it vpon that land from whence you
receiued your Barley, which is most barraine: and if you want cart
Manure, you shall then lay your fould of Sheepe thereupon, and as soone
as it is Manured, you shall immediately Plow both it & the rest, which
Ardor should be finished by the middest of September, and so suffered to
rest vntill the beginning of October, at which time you shall beginne to
sow all that field ouer with Rye in such sort as hath beene spoken of in
former places.
{SN: Obiection.}
Now in as much as the ignorant Husbandman may very easiely imagine that
I reckon vp his labours too thicke, and therein leaue him no leasure for
his necessarie businesses, especially because I appoint him to foile his
land from the middest of Iuly, till the middest of August, which is both
a busie time for his Hay haruest, and also for his Rye shearing.
{SN: Answere.}
To this I make answere, that I write not according to that which poore
men are able (for it were infinit to looke into estates) but according
as euery good Husband ought, presupposing that he which will liue by the
Plough, ought to pursue all things belonging vnto the Plough, and then
he shall finde that there is no day in the yeere, but the Saboth, but it
is necessarie that the Plough be going: yet to reconcile the poore and
the rich together, they shall vnterstand, that when I speake of Plowing
in the time of Haruest, I doe not meane that they should neglect any
part of that principall Worke, which is the true recompence of their
labour: but because whilst the dew is vpon the ground, or when there is
either raine or mizling there is then no time for Haruest Worke, then my
meaning is that the carefull Husbandman shall take those aduantages, and
rising earelier in the mornings, be sure to be at his Plough two howers
before the dew be from the ground, knowing that the getting but of one
hower in the day compasseth a great worke in a month, neither shall hee
neede to feare the ouer toiling of his cattell, sith at that time of the
yeere Grasse being at greatest plenty, strongest and fullest of hart,
Corne scattered almost in euery corner, and the mouth of the beast not
being muzeld in his labour, there is no question but he will indure and
worke more then at any other season.
{SN: Of Winter ridging.}
In the beginning of Nouember, you shall beginne to Winter-ridge your
fallow, or tilth-field, which in all points shalbe done according to the
forme described in the former soiles: for that Ardor of all other neuer
altereth, because it is as it were a defence against the latter spring,
which else would fill the lands full of weedes, and also against the
rigor of Winter, and therefore it doth lay vp the furrow close together,
which taking the season of the frost, winde, and weather makes the mould
ripe, mellow, and light: and the limitation for this Ardor, is from the
beginning of Nouember, vntill the middest of December.
{SN: Of the Plough.}
{SN: Of the coulture.}
Now as touching the Plough which is best and most proper for this
redde-sand, it differeth nothing in shape and composure of members from
that Plough which is described for the blacke Clay, hauing necessarily
two hales, because the ground being loose and light, the Plough will
with great difficulty hold land, but with the least disorder be euer
ready to runne into the furrow, so that a right hand hale is most
necessarie for the houlding of the plough euen, onely the difference of
the two Ploughes consisteth in this, that the plough for this red-sand,
must be much lesse then the plough for the blacke Clay houlding in the
sizes of the timber the due proportion of the plough for the white or
gray clay, or if it be somewhat lesse it is not amisse, as the head
being eighteene inches, the maine beame not aboue foure foote, and
betweene the hinder part of the rest, and the out-most part of the
plough head in the hinder end not aboue eight inches. Now for the
Plough-Irons which doe belong vnto this plough, the Coulture is to be
made circular, in such proportion as the coulture for the gray, or white
clay, and in the placing, or tempering vpon the Plough it is to be set
an inch at least lower then the share, that it may both make way before
the share, and also cut deeper into the land, to make the furrow haue
more easie turning.
{SN: Of the share.}
Now for the share, it differeth in shape from both the former shares,
for it is neither so large nor out-winged, as that for the gray Clay,
for this share is onely made broad to the Plough ward, and small to the
point of the share, with onely a little peake and no wing according to
this figure.
{SN: Of the plough-slip.}
These Plough-irons, both coulture and share, must be well steeled and
hardned at the points, because these sandy soiles being full of moisture
and greete, will in short space weare and consume the Irons, to the
great hinderance and cost of the Husbandman, if it be not preuented by
steele and hardning, which notwithstanding will waste also in these
soiles, so that you must at least twise in euery Ardor haue your Irons
to the Smith, and cause him to repaire them both with Iron and steele,
besides these Irons, of coulture and share, you must also haue a long
piece of Iron, which must be iust of the length of the Plough head, and
as broad as the Plough head is thicke, and in thicknesse a quarter of an
inch: and this piece of Iron must be nailed vpon the outside of the
Plough head, next vnto the land, onely to saue the Plough head from
wearing, for when the Plough is worne it can then no longer hould the
land, and this piece of Iron is called of Husbandmen the Plough-slip and
presenteth this figure.
{Illustration: The Plough-slip.}
{SN: Of Plough clouts.}
Ouer and besides this Plough-slip, their are certaine other pieces of
Iron which are made in the fashion of broad thinne plates, and they be
called Plough clouts, and are to be nailed vpon the shelboard, to defend
it from the earth or furrow which it turneth ouer, which in very short
space would weare the woode and put the Husbandman to double charge.
{SN: The houlding of the Plough.}
Thus hauing shewed you the parts, members, and implements, belonging to
this Plough, it rests that I proceede vnto the teame or draught: for to
speake of the vse and handling of this Plough, it is needelesse, because
it is all one with those Ploughes, of which I haue spoken in the former
Chapters, and he which can hould and handle a Plough in stiffe clayes
must needes (except he be exceeding simple) hould a Plough in these
light sands, in as much as the worke is much more easie and the Plough a
great deale lesse chargeable.
{SN: Of the draught.}
Now for the Draught or Teame, they ought to be as in the former Soiles,
Oxen or Horses, yet the number not so great: for foure Beasts are
sufficient to plow any Ardor vpon this soile, nay, three Horses if they
be of reasenable strength will doe as much as sixe vpon either of the
Clay-soiles: asfor their attire or Harnessing, the Beare-geares, before
described, are the best and most proper. And thus much concerning this
red Sand, wherein you are to take this briefe obseruation with you, that
the Graines which are best to be sowne vpon it, are onely Rye, Barley,
small Pease, _Lentles_ and _Lupines_, otherwise called Fitches, and the
graines to which it is aduerse, are Wheat, Beanes and Maslin.
CHAP. VIII.
_The manner of plowing the white Sand, his Earings, Plough, and
Implements._
Next vnto this red Sand, is the white sand, which is much more barraine
then the red Sand, yet by the industry of the Husbandman in plowing, and
by the cost of Manure it is made to beare corne in reasonable plentie.
Now of white Sands there be two kindes, the one a white Sand mixt with a
kinde of Marle, as that in Norffolke, Suffolke, and other such like
places butting vpon the Sea-coast: the other a white Sand with Pible, as
in some parts of Surrey, about Ancaster in Lincolne shire, and about
Salisbury in Wil-shire.
{SN: Of the white Sand with Pible.}
Now for this white Sand with Pible, it is the barrainest, and least
fruitfull in bringing forth, because it hath nothing but a hot dustie
substance in it. For the manner of Earing thereof, it agreeth in all
points with the redde Sand, the Ardors being all one, the Tempers,
Manurings and all other appurtenances: the Seede also which it delights
in is all one with the red Sand, as namely, Rye, Barley, Pease and
Fitches. Wherefore who so shall dwell vpon such a soile, I must referre
him to the former Chapter of the red Sand, and therein he shall finde
sufficient instruction how to behaue himselfe vpon this earth:
remembring that in as much as it is more barraine then the red Sand, by
so much it craueth more care and cost, both in plowing and manuring
thereof, which two labours onely make perfect the ill ground.
{SN: Of the white Sand with Marle.}
Now for the white Sand which hath as it were a certaine mixture, or
nature of Marle in it, you shall vnderstand that albeit vnto the eye it
be more dry and dustie then the red Sand, yet it is fully as rich as the
red Sand: for albe it doe not beare Barley in as great plenty as the red
Sand, yet it beareth Wheate abundantly, which the red Sand seldome or
very hardly bringeth forth.
{SN: Of Fallowing.}
Wherefore to proceede to the Earings or tillage of this white Marly
sand, you shall vnderstand that about the middest of Ianuary is fit time
to beginne to fallow your field which shall be tilth and rest for this
yeere: wherein by the way, before I proceede further, you shall take
this obseruation with you, that whereas in the former soiles I diuided
the fields into three & foure parts, this soile cannot conueniently, if
it be well husbanded, be diuided into any more parts then two, that is
to say, a fallow field, and a Wheat-field: in which Wheate-field if you
haue any land richer then other, you may bestow Barley vpon it, vpon the
second you may bestow Wheat, vpon the third sort of ground Rye, and vpon
the barrainest, Pease or Fitches: and yet all these must be sowne within
one field, because in this white sand, Wheate and Rye will not grow
after Barley or Pease, nor Barley and Pease after Wheate or Rye. Your
fields being then diuided into two parts, that is, one for corne, the
other for rest, you shall as before I said, about the middest of Ianuary
beginne to fallow your Tith-field, which in all obseruations you shall
doe according as is mentioned for the red sand.
{SN: Of sowing Pease.}
About the middest of March, if you haue any barraine or wasted ground
within your fallow field, or if you haue any occasion to breake vp any
new ground, which hath not beene formerly broake vp, in eyther of these
cases you shall sow Pease or Fitches thereupon, and those Pease or
Fitches you shall sow vnder furrow as hath beene before described.
{SN: Of Spring-fallowing.}
About the middest of Aprill you shall plow your fallow-field ouer
againe, in such manner as you plowed when you fallowed it first: and
this is called Spring-fallowing, and is of great benefit because at that
time the weedes and quickes beginning to spring, nay, to flowrish, by
reason that the heate of the climbe puts them forth sooner then in other
soyles, if they should not be plowed vp before they take too strong
roote, they would not onely ouer-runne, but also eate out the hart of
the Land.
{SN: Of sowing Barley.}
About the middest of May you shall beginne to sow your Barley vpon the
richest part of your old fallow-field, which at the Michaelmas before,
when you did sow your Wheate, and Rye, and Maslin, you did reserue for
that purpose: and this Barley you shall sow in such sort as is mentioned
in the former Chapter of the red Sand, in so much that this Ardor being
finished, which is the last part of your Seede-time, your whole field
shall be furnished eyther with Wheate, if it hold a temperate fatnesse,
or with Wheate and Barley, if it be rich and richer, or with Wheate,
Barley and Pulse, if it be rich, poore or extreame barraine: and the
manner of sowing all these seuerall seedes is described in the Chapters
going before.
About the middest of Iune you shall beginne to Summer-stirre your
fallow-field, in such sort as was spoken of in the former Chapters
concerning the other soiles: for in this Ardor there is no alteration of
methode, but onely in gouernment of the Plough, considering the
heauinesse and lightnesse of the earth. During this Ardor you shall
busily apply your labour in leading forth your Manure, for it may at
great ease be done both at one season, neyther the Plough hindering the
Cart, nor the Cart staying the Plough: for this soile being more light
and easie in worke then any other soile whatsoeuer, doth euer preserue
so many Cattell for other imployment that both workes may goe forward
together, as shall be shewed when wee come to speake of the Plough, and
the Teame which drawes it.
{SN: Of Manuring.}
Now as touching the Manures most fit for this soyle, they be all those
of which we haue formerly written, ashes onely excepted, which being of
an hot nature doe scald the Seede, and detaine it from all
fruitfulnesse, being mixt with this hot soile, so is likewise Lyme, and
the burning of stubble: other Manures are both good and occasion much
fertilitie, as being of a binding and coole nature, and holding together
that loosenesse which in his too much separation taketh all nutriment
from the earth.
{SN: Of Weeding.}
After you haue ledde forth your Manure, and Summer-stird your Land, you
shall then about the beginning of Iulie looke into your Corne-field, and
if you perceiue any Thistles, or any other superfluous weedes to annoy
your Corne, you shall then (as is before said) either cut, or plucke
them vp by the rootes.
{SN: Of Foyling.}
About the middest of August you shall beginne to foile or cast downe
your fallow-field againe, and in that Ardor you shall be very carefull
to plow cleane and leaue no weedes vncut vp: for in these hot soiles if
any weedes be left with the least roote, so that they may knit and bring
forth seede, the annoyance thereof will remaine for at least foure
yeeres after, which is a double fallowing. And to the end that you may
cut vp all such weedes cleane, although both your Share and Coulture
misse them, you shall haue the rest of your Plough in the vnder part
which strokes alongst the earth filled all full of dragges of Iron, that
is, of olde crooked nailes or great tenter-hookes, such as vpon the
putting downe of your right hand when you come neere a weed shall catch
hold thereof and teare it vp by the rootes, as at this day is vsed be
many particular Husbands in this kingdome, whose cares, skils, and
industries are not inferiour to the best whatsoeuer.
{SN: Of Sowing Wheate and Rye.}
{SN: The choise of Seede.}
About the middest of September, you shall beginne to sow your Wheate and
Rye vpon your fallow field, which Graine vpon this soile is to be
reckoned the most principall: and you shall sow it in the same manner
that is described in the former Chapters, wherein your especiallest care
is the choise of your seede: for in this soile your whole-straw Wheate,
nor your great Pollard taketh any delight, neither your Organe, for all
those three must haue a firme and a strong mould: but your
Chilter-wheate, your Flaxen-wheate, your White-pollard, and your
Red-wheate, which are the Wheates which yeeld the purest and finest
meale, (although they grow not in so great abundance) are the seedes
which are most proper and naturall for this soile. As for Rye or Maslin,
according to the goodnesse of the ground so you shall bestow your seede:
for it is a generall rule, that wheresoeuer your Wheate growes, there
will euer Rye grow, but Rye will many times grow where Wheate will not
prosper; and therefore for the sowing of your Rye, it must be according
to the temper of the earth, and the necessitie of your houshold: for
Wheate being a richer graine then Rye, if you be assured that your
ground will beare Wheate well, it is small Husbandrie to sow more Rye or
Maslin then for your house: but if it be too hot for Wheate, and kindly
for Rye, then it is better to haue good Rye, then ill Wheate. Now for
the sowing of your Rye or Maslin in this soile, it differeth nothing
from the former soiles, either in plowing or any other obseruation, that
is to say, it must be plowed aboue furrow: for Rye being the most tender
graine, it can neither abide the waight of earth, nor yet moisture; the
one, as it were, burying, and the other drowning the vigour and strength
of the seede.
{SN: Of Winter-ridging.}
About the beginning of Nouember you shall Winter-ridge your fallow
field, I meane that part which you doe preserue for Barley (for the
other part is furnished with seede) and this Winter-ridging differeth
nothing from the Winter ridging of other soiles, onely you shall a
little more precisely obserue to set vp your lands more straight and
high then in other soiles, both to defend them from wet, which this
soile is much subiect vnto, because commonly some great riuer is neare
it, and also for the preseruing of the strength and goodnesse of the
Manure within the land which by lying open and vnclosed would soone be
washt forth and consumed.
{SN: Of the clensing of lands, or drawing of water-furrowes.}
Now sith I haue here occasion to speake something of the draining of
lands, and the keeping of them from the annoyance of superfluous wet,
whether it be by invndation or otherwise, you shall vnderstand that it
is the especiall office and dutie of euery good Husbandman, not onely in
this soile, but in all other whatsoeuer, to haue a principall respect to
the keeping of his land dry, and to that end hee shall diligently (as
soone as he hath Winter-rigged his land) take a carefull view how his
lands lie, which way the descent goes from whence annoyance or water may
possibly come, and so consequently from those obseruations, with a Spade
or strong Plough, of extraordinary greatnesse, draw certaine deepe
furrowes from descent vnto descent, by which meanes all the water may be
conuayed from his lands, eyther into some common Sewer, Lake, Brooke, or
other maine Riuer: and to this end it is both a rule in the common Lawes
of our Land, and a laudable custome in the Common-wealth of euery Towne,
that for as much as many Townes haue their lands lie in common, that is
to say, mixed neighbour with neighbour, few or none hauing aboue two or
three lands at the most lying together in one place, therefore euery man
shall ioyne, and make their water-furrowes one from another, vntill such
time as the water be conuayed into some common issue, as well hee whose
lands be without all danger, as he that is troubled with the greatest
annoyance, and herein euery one shall beare his particular charge: which
is an Act of great vertue and goodnesse.
{SN: Of the Plough.}
Now for the Plough which is to plow this white sand it doth differ
nothing in size, proportion, and vse of handling from the Plough
described for the red Sand, onely it hath one addition more, that is to
say, at the further end of the maine Beame of the Plough, where you
fixe your Plough-foote, there you shall place a little paire of round
wheeles, which bearing the Beame vpon a loose mouing Axletree, being
iust the length of two furrows and no more, doth so certainly guide the
Plough in his true furrow that it can neither lose the land by swaruing
(as in these light soiles euery Plough is apt to doe) nor take too much
land, eyther by the greedinesse of the plough or sharpnesse of the
Irons, neither can it drownd through the easie lightnesse of the earth,
nor runne too shallow through the fussinesse of the mould, but the
wheeles being made of a true proportion, which should not be aboue
twelue inches from the centre, the Plough with a reasonable hand of
gouernment shall runne in a direct and euen furrow: the proportion of
which Plough is contained in this Figure.
{Illustration: The Plough with Wheeles.}
This plough of all others I hold to be most ancient, and as being the
modell of the first inuention, and at this day is preserued both in
France, Germany, & Italy, and no other proportion of Ploughes knowne,
both as we perceiue by our experience in seeing them plow, & also by
reading of their writings: for neither in _Virgil_, _Columella_,
_Xenophon_, nor any olde Writer: nor in _Heresbachius_, _Steuens_, nor
_Libault_, being later Writers, finde wee any other Plough bequeathed
vnto our memories. Yet it is most certaine, that in many of our English
soiles, this Plough is of little profit, as we finde by daily experience
both in our clayes, and many of our mixt earths: for in truth this
Plough is but onely for light, sandy, or grauelly soiles, as for the
most part these forraine Countries are, especially about the sea-coast,
or the borders of great Cities, from whence these Writers most generally
tooke the presidents for their writings.
{SN: Of the plough-Irons.}
Now for the parts of this Plough, it consisteth of the same members
which the former Ploughs doe, onely that in stead of the Plough-foote it
hath a paire of wheeles. It hath also but one Hale, in such sort as the
Plough for the gray or white clay. The beame also of this Plough is much
more straight then the former, by which meanes the Skeath is not full so
long. The Irons belonging vnto this Plough are of the fashion of the
former Irons, onely they be somewhat lesse, that is to say, the Coulture
is not so long, neyther so full bent as that for the red Sand, nor so
straight as that for the blacke clay, but as it were holding a meane
betweene both: so likewise the Share is not fully so broad as that for
the red sand, nor so narrow as that for the gray clay, but holds as it
were a middle size betweene both, somewhat leaning in proportion to the
shape of that for the blacke clay. As for the Plough-slip,
Plough-clouts, and other implements which are to defend the wood from
the hardnesse of the earth, they are the same, and in the same wise to
be vsed as those for the red Sand.
{SN: Of the draught.}
Now for the Draught or Teame which drawes this Plough, they are as in
all other Draughts, Oxen or Horses, but for the number thereof they
differ much from those which are formerly written of: for you shall
vnderstand that in this white sandy soile, which is of all soiles the
lightest, eyther two good Horses, or two good Oxen are a number
sufficient to plow any Ardor vpon this soile whatsoeuer, as by daily
experience we may see in those countries whose soile consists of this
white light Sand, of which wee haue now written: neyther shall the
Plow-man vpon this soile neede any person to driue or order his Plough
more then himselfe: for the soile being so light and easie to cut, the
Plough so nimble, and the Cattell so few and so neare him, hauing euer
his right hand at libertie (because his plough hath but onely a left
hand Hale) he hath liberty euer to carry a goade or whip in his right
hand, to quicken and set forward his Cattell, and also a line which
being fastned to the heads of the Beasts, hee may with it euer when hee
comes to the lands end, stop them and turne them vpon which hand he
pleases. And thus much for the tillage and ordering of this white Sand.
CHAP. IX.
_The manner of plowing the Grauell with Pible stones, or the Grauell with
Flint, their Earings, Plough, and implements._
Hauing in the plainest manner I can written sufficiently already of the
foure simple and vncompounded soiles, to wit, two Clayes, blacke and
gray, and two Sands, red and white, it now rests that I also giue you
some perfect touch or taste of the mixt or compounded soiles, as namely,
the grauell which is a kinde of hard sand, clay and stone mixt together:
and of Grauels there be two kindes, that is to say, one that is mixt
with little small Pible stones, as in many parts of Middlesex, Kent, and
Surry: and the Grauell mixt with broad Flints, as in many parts of
Hartford-shire, Essex, and sundry such places. These Grauels are both,
in generall, subiect to much barrainnesse, especially if they be
accompanied with any extraordinary moisture, yet with the good labour of
plowing, and with the cost of much Manure, they are brought to
reasonable fruitfulnesse, where it comes to passe that the Plow-man
which is master of such a soile, if either he liue not neare some Citie
or Market-towne, where great store of Manure, by the concourse of
people, is daily bred, and so consequently is very cheape, or else haue
not in his owne store and breede, meanes to raise good store of Manure,
hee shall seldome thriue and prosper thereupon. Now although in these
grauell soiles there is a diuersity of mixture, as the one mingled with
small Pibles, which indeede is the worst mixture, the other with broad
Flints, which is the better signe of fruitfulnesse: yet in their order
of tillage or Earings, in their weeding and cleansing, and in all other
ardors and obseruations, they differ nothing at all, the beginning and
ending of each seuerall worke being all one.
Now for the manner of worke belonging vnto these two soiles, it altereth
in no respect nor obseruation eyther in Plough, plowing, manuring,
weeding, or any other thing whatsoeuer, from that of the white sand, the
same times of the yeere, the same Seedes, and the same Earings being
euer to be obserued, wherefore it shall be needlesse to write so amply
of these soiles as of the former, because being all one with the white
Sand, without alteration, it were but to write one thing twice, and
therefore I referre the Reader to the former Chapter, and also the
Husbandman that shall liue vpon either of these soiles, onely with these
few caueats: First, that for the laying his lands, hee shall lay them in
little small stitches, that is, not hauing aboue foure furrowes laid
together, as it were for one land, in such sort as you see in
Hartford-shire, Essex, Middlesex, Kent and Surry: for this soile being
for the most part subiect to much moisture and hardnesse, if it should
be laid in great lands, according to the manner of the North parts, it
would ouer-burden, choake and confound the seed which is throwne into
it. Secondly, you shall not goe about to gather off the stones which
seeme as it were to couer the lands, both because the labour is infinite
and impossible, as also because those stones are of good vse, and as it
were a certaine Manuring and helpe vnto the ground: for the nature of
this Grauell being colde and moist, these stones doe in the winter time,
defend and keepe the sharpnesse of the Frosts and bleake windes from
killing the heart or roote of the seedes, and also in the Summer it
defends the scorching heate of the Sunne from parching and drying vp the
Seede, which in this grauelly soile doth not lie so well couered, as in
other soyles, especially if this kinde of earth be inuironed with any
great hils (as most commonly it is) the reflection whereof makes the
heate much more violent. And lastly, to obserue that there is no manure
better or more kindly for this kinde of earth then Chaulke, white Marle,
or Lyme: for all other matters whatsoeuer the former Chapter of the
white Sand, will giue you sufficient instructions.
CHAP. X.
_The manner of plowing the blacke Clay mixt with red Sand, and the white
Clay mixt with white Sand, their Earings, Plough and Implements._
Next to these grauelly soiles, there be also two other compounded
earths, as namely, the blacke Clay mixt with red Sand, and the white
Clay mixt with white sand, which albe they differ in composition of
mould, yet they hold one nature in their Tillage and Husbandry:
wherefore first to speake of the blacke Clay mixt with red Sand, which
(as before I said) is called of Husbandmen an hassell earth, you shall
vnderstand that it is a very rich and good soile, very fruitfull both
for Corne and Grasse: for Corne, being apt to beare any seede
whatsoeuer: and for Grasse, as naturally putting it forth very earely in
the yeere, by which your Cattell shall get reliefe sooner then in other
soiles of colder nature: for both the blacke and white claies doe
seldome flowrish with any store of Grasse before Iune, which is the
time of wood-seare, and this soile will boast of some plenty about the
beginning of Aprill at the furthest: but for Grasse we shall speake in
his proper place.
{SN: Of fallowing.}
Now for his tillage it is thus: you shall about the middest of Ianuary,
beginne to fallow that field which you intend that yeere shall lye at
rest or tilth, and you shall fallow it in such sort as is specified in
the Chapter of the blacke clay: onely you shall raise small furrowes and
Plow the land cleane, being sure to open and cast the land downeward if
the land lie high and round, otherwise you shall neuer at any time cast
the land downe but ridge it vp, that is to say, when you fallow it, you
shall cast the first furrow downeward, and so likewise the second, which
two furrowes being cleane ploughed, will lay the land open inough, that
is, there wilbe no part of the ridge vnploughed: which done, by changing
your hand and the gate of your Plough, you shall plough those furrowes
backe againe and lay them vpward, and so plough the whole land vpward,
also laying it round and high: the reason for this manner of plowing
being this, that for as much as this land being mixt of clay and sand,
must needes be a sore binding land, therefore if it should be laid flat,
if any great raine or wet should fall, and a present drought follow it,
neither should you possibly force your Plough to enter into it and
breake it, or being broken should you get so much mould as to couer your
Corne and giue the seede comfort, whereas vpon the contrary part, if it
be laid high and vpright, it must necessarily be laid hollow and light,
in so much that you may both Plough it at your pleasure, and also beget
so perfect a mould as any other soile whatsoeuer, both because the wet
hath liberty to auoide through the hollownesse, and also because the
Sunne and weather hath power to enter and season it, wherefore in
conclusion you shall fallow this field downeward if it lye high and
vpright, otherwise you shall fallow it vpward as the meanes to bring it
to the best Ardor.
Now for this fallow field it must euer be made where the yeere before
you did reape your Pease, in case you haue but three fields, or where
you did reape your Wheate, Rye, and Maslin, in case you haue foure
fields, according to the manner of the blacke clay.
{SN: Of sowing Pease.}
About the middest of February, which is within a day or two of Saint
_Valentines_ day, if the season be any thing constant in fairenesse and
drinesse, you shall then beginne to sow your Pease, for you must
vnderstand that albeit this soile will beare Beanes, yet they are
nothing so naturall for it as Pease, both because they are an hungry
seede and doe much impaire and wast the ground, and also because they
prosper best in a fat, loose, and tough earth, which is contrary to this
hard and drie soile: but especially if you haue foure fields, you shall
forbeare to sow any Beanes at all, least you loose two commodities, that
is, both quantitie of graine (because Beanes are not so long and
fruitfull vpon this earth, as vpon the clayes) and the Manuring of your
ground, which Pease out of their owne natures doe, both by the
smoothering of the ground and their owne fatnesse, when your Beanes doe
pill and sucke the hart out of the earth.
Now for the manner of sowing your Pease, you shall sow them aboue
furrow, that is, first plough the land vpward, then immediately sow your
Pease, and instantly after Harrow them, the Plough, the Seedes-man, and
the Harrower, by due course, following each other, and so likewise you
may sow Oates vpon this soile.
{SN: Of sowing Barley.}
About the middest of March, which is almost a fortnight before our Lady
day, you shall beginne to sow your Barley, which Barley you shall sow
neither vnder-furrow nor aboue, but after this order: first, you shall
plow your land downeward, beginning at the furrow and so assending
vpward to the ridge of the land, which as soone as you haue opened, you
shall then by pulling the plough out of the earth, and laying the
shelboard crosse the ridge, you shall fill the ridge in againe with the
same mould which you plowed vp: this done, your seedes-man shall bring
his Barley and sow the land aboue furrow: after the land is sowne, you
shall then Harrow it as small as may be, first with a paire of woodden
Harrowes, and after with a paire of Iron Harrowes, or else with a double
Oxe Harrow, for this earth being somewhat hard and much binding, will
aske great care and dilligence in breaking.
{SN: Of sleighting.}
After your Barley is sowne, you shall about the latter end of Aprill
beginne to smooth and sleight your land, both with the backe Harrowes
and with the rouler, and looke what clots they faile to breake, you
shall with clotting beetles beate them asunder, making your mould as
fine and laying your land as smooth as is possible.
About the middest of May, you shall, if any wet fall, beginne to
Summer-stirre your land, or if no wet fall, you shall doe your indeauour
to Summer-stirre your land, rather aduenturing to breake two ploughes,
then to loose one day in that labour, knowing this, that one land
Summer-stird in a dry season, is better then three Summer-stird in a wet
or moist weather, both because it giues the earth a better temper, and
kils the weedes with more assurednesse, and as I speake of
Summer-stirring, so I speake of all other Ardors, that the drier they
are done the better they are euer done: and in this season you shall
also gather the stones from your ground.
{SN: Obiection.}
Now it may be obiected, that if it be best to plough in drie seasons, it
is then best to fallow also in a dry season, and by that meanes not to
beginne to fallow vntill the beginning of May, as is prescribed for the
blacke clay, and so to deferre the Summer-stirring till the next month
after, sith of necessitie Ianuary must either be wet or else vnkindely.
{SN: Answere.}
To this I make answere, that most true it is, that the land which is
last fallowed is euer the best and most fruitfull, yet this mixt earth
which is compound of sand and clay, is such a binding earth, that if it
be not taken and fallowed in a moist-time of the yeere, as namely, in
Ianuary or February, but suffered to lye till May, at which time the
drought hath so entered into him, that the greatest part of his moisture
is decaied, then I say, the nature of the ground is such and so hard,
that it wilbe impossible to make any plough enter into it, so that you
shall not onely aduenture the losse of that speciall Ardor, but also of
all the rest which should follow after, and so consequently loose the
profit of your land: where contrary wise if you fallow it at the
beginning of the yeere, as in Ianuary, and February, albe they be wet,
yet shall you lay vp your furrowes and make the earth more loose, by
which meanes you shall compasse all the other Earings which belong to
your soile: for to speake briefely, late fallowing belongs vnto claies,
which by drought are made loose and light, and earely fallowings vnto
mixt soiles, such as these which by drinesse doe ingender and binde
close together.
{SN: Of weeding.}
About the middest of Iune, you shall beginne to weede your Corne, in
such sort as hath beene before described in the former Chapters: and
although this soile naturally of it selfe (if it haue receiued his whole
Ardor in due seasons, and haue beene Ploughed cleane, according to the
office of a good Husband) doth neither put forth Thistle or other weede,
yet if it want either the one or the other, it is certaine that it puts
them forth in great abundance, for by Thistles and weedes, vpon this
soile, is euer knowne the goodnesse and dilligence of the Husbandman.
{SN: Of Foiling.}
About the middest of Iuly, you shall beginne to foile your land, in such
sort also as hath beene mentioned in the former Chapters, onely with
this obseruation that if any of your lands lie flat, you shall then, in
your foiling, plough those lands vpward and not downeward, holding your
first precept that in this soile, your lands must lie high, light, and
hollow, which if you see they doe, then you may if you please in your
foiling cast them downeward, because at Winter ridging you may set them
vp againe.
{SN: Of Manuring.}
Now for as much as in this Chapter I haue hitherto omitted to speake of
Manuring this soile, you shall vnderstand that it is not because I hold
it so rich that it needeth no Manure, but because I know there is
nothing more needfull vnto it then Manure, in so much that I wish not
the Husbandman of this ground to binde himselfe vnto any one particular
season of the yeere for the leading forth of his Manure, but to bestow
all his leasurable houres and rest from other workes onely vpon this
labor, euen through the circuit of the whole yeere, knowing this most
precisely, that at what time of the yeere so euer you shall lay Manure
vpon this earth it will returne much profit.
As for the choise of Manures vpon this soile they are all those
whatsoeuer, of which I haue formerly intreated in any of the other
Chapters, no Manure whatsoeuer comming amisse to this ground: prouided
that the Husbandman haue this respect to lay vpon his moystest and
coldest ground his hottest Manures, and vpon his hottest and driest
earth his coolest and moistest Manures: the hot Manures being
Sheepes-dung, Pigions-dung, Pullen-dung, Lyme, Ashes, and such like: the
coole being Oxe-dung, Horse-dung, the scowrings of Ponds, Marle, and
such like.
{SN: Of Winter-ridging.}
About the middest of September you shall beginne to Winter-ridge your
Land, which in all points you shall doe according as is mentioned in the
former Chapters of the Clayes: for in this Ardor there is neuer any
difference, onely this one small obseruation, that you may aduenture to
Winter-ridge this mixt earth sooner then any other: for many of our best
English Husbandmen which liue vpon this soile doe hold this opinion,
that if it be Winter-ridged so earely in the yeere, that through the
vertue of the latter spring it put forth a certaine greene weede like
mosse, bring short and soft, that the land is so much the better
therefore, being as they imagine both fed and comforted by such a
slender expression which doth not take from the land any hart, but like
a warme couering doth ripen and make mellow the mould, and this cannot
be effected but onely by earely Winter-ridging.
{SN: Of Sowing of Wheate, Rye, and Maslin.}
At the end of September you shall beginne to sow your Wheate, Rye, and
Maslin, all which Graines are very naturall, good, and profitable vpon
this soile, and are to be sowne after the same manner, and with the same
obseruations which are specified in the former Chapter of the blacke
clay, that is to say, the Wheate vnder furrow, and vnharrowed, the Rye
and Maslin aboue furrow, and well harrowed. And herein is also to be
remembred all those precepts mentioned in the Chapter of the blacke
Clay, touching the diuision of the fields, that is to say, if you haue
three fields, you shall then sow your Wheate, Rye and Maslin in your
fallow-field, and so saue both the Foyling and double manuring of so
much earth: but if you haue foure fields, then you shall sow those
graines vpon that land from whence the same yeere you did reape your
Pease; your Wheate hauing no other Manure then that which came by the
Pease, your Rye hauing, if possible, eyther Manure from the Cart, or
from the Folde, in such sort as hath beene shewed in the Chapter of the
blacke Clay, and this of Husbandmen is called Inam-wheate or Inam-rye,
that is, white-corne sowne after white-corne, as Barley after Barley, or
hard-corne after hard-corne, which is wheate after Pease.
{SN: Of the plough.}
Now for the Plough which is most proper for this soile it is to be made
of a middle size betwixt that for the blacke Clay, and that for the red
Sand, being not all out so bigge and vnwieldy as the first, nor so
slender and nimble as the latter, but taking a middle proportion from
them both, you shall make your Plough of a competent fitnesse.
As for the Irons, the Share must be of the same proportion that the
Share for the red Sand is, yet a little thought bigger, and the Coulture
of the fashion of that Coulture, onely not full so much bent, but
all-out as sharpe and as long: and these Irons must be euer well
maintained with steele, for this mixt earth is euer the hardest, and
weareth both the Plough and Irons soonest, and therefore it is agreed
by all Husbandmen that this Plough must not at any time want his
Plough-slip, except at the first going of the Plough you shall finde
that it hath too much land, that is to say, by the crosse setting on of
the beame, that it runneth too greedily into the land, which to helpe,
you shall let your Plough goe without a plough-slip, till the
plough-head be so much worne, that it take no more but an ordinary
furrow, and then you shall set on your Plough-slips and Plough clouts
also: but I write this in case there be imperfection in the Plough,
which if it be otherwise, then this obseruation is needlesse.
{SN: Of the Teame.}
Now for the Teame or Draught which shall draw this Plough, they are as
the former, Oxen or Horses, and their number the same that is prescribed
for the blacke Clay, as namely, eight or sixe Beasts for Pease-earth,
for Fallowing, and Summer-stirring, and sixe or foure for all other
Ardors: for you must vnderstand that this mixt and binding soile,
through his hardnesse, and glutenous holding together, is as hard to
plow as any clay-soile whatsoeuer, and in some speciall seasons more by
many degrees.
{SN: Of the white clay with white Sand.}
Now for the white clay mixt with white sand, it is an earth much more
barraine, then this former mixt earth, and bringeth forth nothing
without much care, diligence, and good order: yet, for his manner of
Earings, in their true natures euery way doe differ nothing from the
Earings of this blacke clay and red Sand, onely the Seede which must be
sowne vpon this soile differeth from the former: for vpon this soile in
stead of Barley you must sow most Oates, as a Graine which will take
much strength from little fertilitie: and in stead of Rye you shall sow
more Wheate and more Pease, or in stead of Pease then you shall sow
Fitches of eyther kinde which you please, and the increase will be
(though not in abundance, yet) so sufficient as shall well quit the
Plow-mans labour.
{SN: Of Manuring.}
Now for the Manuring of this ground, you shall vnderstand that Marle is
the chiefest: for neyther will any man suppose that this hard soile
should bring vp cattell sufficient to manure it, nor if it would, yet
that Manure were not so good: for a barraine clay being mixt with a most
barraine sand, it must consequently follow that the soile must be of all
the barenest, insomuch that to giue perfect strength and life vnto it,
there is nothing better then Marle, which being a fat and strong clay,
once incorporated within these weake moulds, it must needes giue them
the best nourishment, loosening the binding substance, and binding that
weaknesse which occasioneth the barrainnesse: but of this Marle I shall
haue more occasion to speake hereafter in a particular Chapter, onely
thus much I must let you vnderstand, that this soile, albe it be not
within any degree of praise for the bringing forth of Corne, yet it is
very apt and fruitfull for the breeding of grasse, insomuch that it will
beare you corne for at least nine yeeres together (without the vse of
any fallow or Tilth-field) if it be well marled, and immediately after
it will beare you very good breeding grasse, or else reasonable Medow
for as many yeeres after, as by daily experience we see in the Countries
of Lancaster and Chester. So that the consequence being considered, this
ground is not but to be held indifferent fruitfull: for whereas other
soiles afore shewed (which beare abundance of Graine) are bound to be
manured once in three yeeres, this soile, albe it beare neither so rich
graine, nor so much plenty, yet it needes marling not aboue once in
sixteene or eighteene yeeres: and albe Marle be a Manure of the greatest
cost, yet the profit by continuance is so equall that the labour is
neuer spent without his reward, as shall more largely appeare hereafter.
{SN: Of the Plough.}
As touching the Plough, it is the same which is mentioned in the other
soile of the blacke Clay, and red Sand, altering nothing eyther in
quantitie of timber, or strength of Irons: so that to make any large
description thereof, is but to double my former discourses, and make my
writings tedious.
For to conclude briefely, these two soiles differ onely but in fatnesse
and strength of nature, not in Earing, or plowing, so that the labours
of tillage being equall there is not any alteration more then the true
diligence of much manuring, which will breede an affinitie or alyance
betwixt both these soiles. And thus much for this blacke Clay and red
Sand, or white Clay and white Sand.
{Illustration}
THE
FIRST PART
OF THE ENGLISH
Husbandman:
Contayning, the manner of plowing and Manuring all sorts of Soyles,
together with the manner of planting and setting of Corne.
CHAP. I.
_Of the manner of plowing all simple Earths, which are vncompounded._
That many famous and learned men, both in Fraunce, Spaine, Italy and
Germany, haue spent all their best time in shewing vnto the world the
excellencie of their experiences, in this onely renowned Arte of
Husbandry, their large and learned Volumes, most excellently written, in
that kinde, are witnesses: from whence we by translations haue gotten
some contentment, though but small profit; because those forraine
clymates, differing much from ours, both in nature of earth, and temper
of Ayre, the rules and obseruations belonging vnto them can be little
auailable to vs, more then to know what is done in such parts, a thing
more appertaining to our conference then practise. But now, that other
kingdomes may see though wee write lesse yet wee know as much as
belongeth to the office of the English Husbandman, I, though the meanest
of many millions, haue vndertaken to deliuer vnto the world all the true
rudiments, obseruations and knowledges what soeuer, which hath any
affinitie or alliance with English Husbandry. And for as much as the
best and principallest part of Husbandry consisteth in the plowing and
earring of the ground (for in that onely _Adam_ began his first labours)
I thinke it not vnmeete, first to treate of that subiect, proceeding so
from braunch to braunch, till I haue giuen euery one sufficient
knowledge.
To speake then first of the Tilling of Grounds. You shall well
vnderstand, that it is the office of euery good Husbandman before he put
his plough into the earth, truly to consider the nature of his Grounds,
and which is of which quallitie and temper. To proceede then to our
purpose; all soyles what soeuer, in this our kingdome of England, are
reduced into two kindes onely, that is to say, Simple or Compound.
Simple, are those which haue no mixture with others of a contrary
quallitie, as are your stiffe clayes, or your loose sands: your stiffe
clayes are likewise diuers, as a blacke clay, a blew clay, and a clay
like vnto Marble. Your sands are also diuers, as a red sand, a white
sand, a yellow sand, and a sand like vnto dust. Your mixt earths are
where any of these clayes and sands are equally or vnindifferently mixed
together, as shalbe at large declared hereafter. Now as touching the
tilling of your simple clayes, it is to be noted, that the blacke clay,
of all earth, is the most fruitfull, and demandeth from the Husbandman
the least toyle, yet bringeth forth his increase in the greatest
abundance: it will well and sufficiently bring forth three crops, eare
it desire rest: namely, the first of Barly, the second of Pease, and the
third of Wheate: It doth not desire much Manure, for it is naturally of
it selfe so fat, rich, and fruitfull, that if you adde strength vnto his
strength, by heaping Manure or Compasse thereupon, you make it either
blast, and mildew the Corne that growes, with the too much fatnesse of
the earth, or else through his extreame rankenesse, to bring it vp in
such abundance that it is not able to stand vpright when it is shot vp,
but falling downe flat to the ground, and the eares of Corne smothering
one another, they bring forth nothing but light Corne, like an emptie
huske, without a kirnell. The best Manure or Compasse therefore that you
can giue such ground, is then to plow it in orderly and dew seasons, as
thus: you shall begin to fallow, or breake vp this soyle, at the
beginning of May, at which time you shall plow it deepe, & take vp a
large furrow, and if your Lands lye any thing flat, it shalbe meete that
you begin on the ridge of the land, and turne all your furrowes vpward,
but if your Lands lye high and vpright, then shall you begin in the
furrow and turne all your furrowes downeward, which is called of
Husbandmen, the casting downe of Land. This first plowing of ground, or
as Husbandmen tearme it, the first ardor, is called fallowing: the
second ardor, which we call stirring of ground, or sommer stirring, you
shall begin in Iuly, which is of great consequence, for by meanes of it
you shall kill all manner of weedes and thistells that would annoy your
Land. In this ardor you must oft obserue that if when you fallowed you
did set vp your Land, then now when you stirre you must cast downe your
Land, and so contrarily, if before you did cast downe, then now you must
set vp: your third ardor, which is called of Husbandmen, winter
ridgeing, or setting vp Land for the whole yeere, you shall begin at the
latter end of September, and you must euer obserue that in this third
ardor you doe alwaies ridge vp your Land, that is to say, you most turne
euery furrow vpward and lay them as close together as may be, for
should you doe otherwise, that is to say, either lay them flat or
loosely, the winter season would so beat and bake them together, that
when you should sow your seede you would hardly get your plough into the
ground.
Now your fourth and last ardor, which must be when you sow your seede,
you shall begin euer about the midst of March, at least one weeke before
our Ladies day, commonly called the Annunciation of _Mary_, and this
ardor you shall euer plow downeward, laying your ridges very well open,
and you shall euer obserue in this ardor, first to sow your seede, and
then after to plow your ground, turning your seede into the earth, which
is called of Husbandmen, sowing vnderfurrow: as soone as your ground is
plowed you shall harrow it with an harrow whose teeth are all of wood,
for these simple earths are of easie temper and will of themselues fall
to dust, then after you haue thus sowne your ground, if then there
remaine any clots or lumpes of earth vnbroken, you shall let them rest
till after the next shower of raine, at which time you shall either with
a heauie rouler, or the backside of your harrowes, runne ouer your
Lands, which is called the sleighting of ground, and it will not onely
breake such clots to dust, but also lay your Land plaine and smoth,
leauing no impediment to hinder the Corne from sprouting and comming
forth. In this same ordor as you are appointed for this blacke clay, in
this same manner you shall ordor both your blew clay & your clay which
is like vnto marble. Now as touching the plough which is fittest for
these clayes, it must be large and strong, the beame long and well
bending, the head thicke and large, the skeeth broad, strong, and well
sloaping, the share with a very large wing, craueing much earth, and the
coulter long, thicke and very straight.
Now touching those lands which are simple and vncompounded, you shall
vnderstand that euery good Husbandman must begin his first ardor (which
is to fallow them) at the beginning of Ianuary, hee must sooner stirre
them, which is the second ardor, at the latter end of Aprill, he shall
cast them downe againe, which is called foyling of Land, at the
beginning of Iuly, which is the third ardor, and wherein is to be noted,
that how soeuer all other ardors are plowed, yet this must euer be cast
downward: the fourth ardor, which is winter-stirring or winter-ridgeing,
must euer begin at the end of September, and the fift and last ardor
must be performed when you sow your ground, which would be at the
middest of May, at the soonest, and if your leasure and abilitie will
giue you leaue, if you turne ouer your ground againe in Ianuary, it will
be much better, for these sands can neuer haue too much plowing, nor too
much Manure, and therefore for them both, you shall apply them so oft as
your leasure will conueniently serue, making no spare when either the
way or opportunitie will giue you leaue. Now for as much as all sands,
being of a hot nature, are the fittest to bring foorth Rye, which is a
graine delighting in drynesse onely, you shall vnderstand, that then you
shall not need to plow your ground aboue foure times ouer, that is, you
shall fallow, sommer stirre, foyle, and in September sow your Corne: and
as these ardors serue the red sand, so are they sufficient for your
white sand, and your yealow sand also. As touching the ploughes fit for
these light earths, they would be little and strong, hauing a short
slender beame and a crooked; a narrow and thinne head, a slender skeeth,
a share without a wing, a coulter thinne and very crooked, and a paire
of hales much bending forward towards the man; and with this manner of
plough you may plow diuers mixt and compounded earths, as the blacke
clay and red sand, or the red sand and white grauell: and thus much as
touching earths that are simple and vncompounded.
CHAP. II.
_Of the manner of plowing the blacke clay mixt with white sand, and the
white clay mixt with red sand: their Earrings, Plough, and Implements._
As touching the mixture of these two seuerall soyles, that is to say,
the blacke clay with white sand, and the white clay with red sand, they
differ not in the nature of plowing, sowing, or in Manuring, from the
soyle which is mixt of a blacke clay and red sand, of which I haue
sufficiently intreated before: onely thus much you shall vnderstand,
that the blacke clay mixt with white sand is so much better and richer
then the white clay mixt with red sand, by as much as the blacke clay is
better then the white clay: and although some Husbandmen in our Land,
hould them to be both of one temper and goodnesse, reasoning thus, that
by how much the blacke clay is better then the white, by so much the red
sand is better then the white sand, so that what the mixture of the one
addeth, the mixture of the other taketh away, and so maketh them all one
in fruitfulnesse and goodnesse: but in our common experience it doth not
so fall out, for wee finde that the blacke clay mixt with white sand, if
it be ordered in the forme of good Husbandry, that is to say, be plowed
ouer at least foure times, before it come to be sowne, and that it be
Manured and compassed in Husbandly fashion, which is to allow at least
eight waine-load to an Aker, that if then vpon such Land you shall sow
either Organe Wheat (in the south parts called red Wheat) or flaxen, or
white Pollard Wheat, that such Wheat will often mildew, and turne as
blacke as soote, which onely showeth too much richnesse and fatnesse in
the earth, which the white clay mixt with red sand hath neuer beene
seene to doe, especially so long as it is vsed in any Husbandly
fashion, neither will the white clay mixt with red sand indure to be
deuided into foure fields, that is to say, to beare three seuerall
crops, one after another, as namely, Barly, Pease, and Wheat, without
rest, which the blacke clay mixt with white sand many times doth, and
thereby againe showeth his better fruitfulnesse: neuerthelesse, in
generalitie I would not wish any good Husbandman, and especially such as
haue much tillage, to deuide either of these soyles into any more then
three fields, both because hee shall ease himselfe and his Cattell of
much toyle, shall not at any time loose the best seasons for his best
workes, and make his commodities, and fruit of his hands labours, by
many degrees more certaine.
You shall also vnderstand, that both these soyles are very much binding,
especially the white clay with red sand, both because the clay,
proceeding from a chaukie and limie substance, and not hauing in it much
fatnesse or fertillitie (which occasioneth seperation) being mixt with
the red sand, which is of a much more hardnesse and aptnesse to knit
together, with such tough matter, it must necessarilie binde and cleaue
together, and so likewise the blacke clay, from whence most naturally
proceedeth your best limestone, being mixt with white sand, doth also
binde together and stifle the seede, if it be not preuented by good
Husbandry.
You shall therefore in the plowing and earring of these two soyles,
obserue two especiall notes; the first, that by no meanes you plow it in
the wet, that is, in any great glut of raine: for if you either lay it
vp, or cast it downe, when it is more like morter then earth, if then
any sunshine, or faire weather, doe immediately follow vpon it, it will
so drie and bake it, that if it be sowne, neither will the seede haue
strength to sprout thorrow it, nor being in any of your other summer
ardors, shall you by any meanes make your plough enter into it againe,
when the season falleth for other plowing. The second, that you haue
great care you lay your Land high and round, that the furrowes, as it
were standing vpright one by another, or lying light and hollow, one
vpon another, you may with more ease, at any time, enter in your plough,
and turne your moulde which way you please, either in the heate of
Sommer, or any other time of the yeere whatsoeuer.
Now as touching the plough, which is most best and proper for these
soyles, it would be the same in sise which is formerly directed for the
red sand, onely the Irons must be altered, for the Coulter would be more
long, sharpe, and bending, and the share so narrow, sharpe, and small as
can conueniently be made, according as is formerly expressed, that not
hauing power to take vp any broad furrow, the furrowes by reason of
there slendernesse may lye many, and those many both hollow, light and
at any time easily to be broken.
As for the Teame which is best to worke in this soyle, they may be
either Horses or Oxen, or Oxen and Horse mixt together, according to the
Husbandmans abillitie, but if hee be a Lord of his owne pleasure and may
commaund, and haue euery thing which is most apt and proper, then in
these two soyles, I preferre the Teame of Horses single, rather then
Oxen, especially in any winter or moist ardor, because they doe not
tread and foyle the ground making it mirie and durtie as the Oxe doth,
but going all in one furrow, doe keepe the Land in his constant
firmenesse.
As touching the clotting, sleighting, weeding, and dressing of these two
soyles, they differ in nothing from the former mixt earths, but desire
all one manner of dilligence: and thus much for these two soyles the
blacke clay mixt with white sand, and the white clay with white red
sand.
CHAP. III.
_A comparison of all the former soyles together, and most especiall notes
for giuing the ignorant Husbandman perfect vnderstanding, of what is
written before._
The reason why I haue thus at large discoursed of euery seuerall soyle,
both simple and compounded, is to show vnto the industrious Husbandman,
the perfect and true reason of the generall alteration of our workes in
Husbandry, through this our Realme of England: for if all our Land, as
it is one kingdome, were likewise of one composition, mixture, and
goodnesse, it were then exceeding preposterous to see those diuersities,
alterations, I, and euen contrary manners of proceedings in Husbandry,
which are daily and hourely vsed: but euery man in his owne worke knowes
the alteration of clymates. Yet for so much as this labour of Husbandry,
consisteth not for the most part in the knowing and vnderstanding
breast, but in the rude, simple, and ignorant Clowne, who onely knoweth
how to doe his labour, but cannot giue a reason why he doth such labour,
more then the instruction of his parents, or the custome of the
Countrie, where it comes to passe (and I haue many times seene the same
to mine admiration) that the skillfullest Clowne which is bred in the
clay soyles, when hee hath beene brought to the sandy ground, hee could
neither hould the plough, temper the plough, nor tell which way in good
order to driue the Cattell, the heauinesse of the one labour being so
contrary to the lightnesse of the other, that not hauing a temperance,
or vnderstanding in his hands, hee hath beene put euen vnto his wittes
ends; therefore I thinke it conuenient, in this place, by a slight
comparison of soyles together, to giue the simplest Husbandman such
direct & plaine rules that he shall with out the study of his braines,
attaine to absolute knowledge of euery seuerall mixture of earth: and
albeit hee shall not be able distinctly to say at the first that it is
compounded of such and such earths, yet hee shall be very able to
deliuer the true reason and manner how such ground (of what nature
soeuer) shall be Husbanded and tilled.
Therefore to begin the Husbandman, is to vnderstand, that generally
there are but two soyles for him to regard, for in them consisteth the
whole Arte of Husbandry: as namely, the open and loose earth, and the
close and fast binding earth, and these two soyles being meare opposites
and contraries, most necessarily require in the Husbandman a double
vnderstanding, for there is no soyle, of what simplicitie or mixture
soeuer it be, but it is either loose or fast.
Now to giue you my meaning of these two words, _loose_ and _fast_, it
is, that euery soyle which vpon parching and dry weather, euen when the
Sunne beames scorcheth, and as it were baketh the earth, if then the
ground vpon such exceeding drought doe moulder and fall to dust, so that
whereas before when it did retaine moisture it was heauie, tough, and
not to be seperated, now hauing lost that glewinesse it is light, loose,
and euen with a mans foote to be spurnd to ashes, all such grounds are
tearmed loose and open grounds, because at no time they doe binde in or
imprison the seede (the frost time onely excepted, which is by
accidence, and not from the nature of the soyle:) and all such grounds
as in their moisture or after the fall of any sodaine raine are soft,
plyable, light, and easie to be wrought, but after when they come to
loose that moistnesse and that the powerfulnesse of the Sunne hath as it
were drid vp their veynes, if then such earths become hard, firme, and
not to be seperated, then are those soyles tearmed fast and binding
soyles, for if there ardors be not taken in their due times, and their
seede cast into them in perfect and due seasons, neither is it possible
for the Plowman to plow them, nor for the seede to sprout through, the
earth being so fastned and as it were stone-like fixt together. Now
sithence that all soyles are drawne into these two heads, fastnes, and
loosenesse, and to them is annexed the diuersitie of all tillage, I will
now show the simple Husbandman which earths be loose, and which fast,
and how without curiositie to know and to distinguish them.
Breifely, all soyles that are simple and of themselues vncompounded, as
namely, all claies, as blacke, white, gray, or blew, and all sands, as
either red, white, or blacke, are open and loose soyles: the claies
because the body and substance of them being held together by moistnes,
that moisture being dryed vp, their strength and stifnesse decayeth, and
sands by reason of their naturall lightnesse, which wanting a more moist
and fixt body to be ioyned with them doe loose all strength of binding
or holding together. Now all mixt or compound earths (except the
compositions of one and the same kinds, as clay with clay, or sand with
sand) are euer fast and binding earths: for betwixt sand and clay, or
clay & grauell, is such an affinitie, that when they be mixt together
the sand doth giue to the clay such hardnesse and drynesse, and the clay
to the sand such moisture and coldnesse, that being fixt together they
make one hard body, which through the warmth of the Sunne bindeth and
cleaueth together. But if it be so that the ignorance of the Husbandman
cannot either through the subtiltie of his eye sight, or the
obseruations gathered from his experience, distinguish of these soyles,
and the rather, sith many soyles are so indifferently mixt, and the
colour so very perfect, that euen skill it selfe may be deceiued: as
first to speake of what mixture some soyles consist, yet for as much as
it is sufficient for the Husbandman to know which is loose and which is
binding, hee shall onely when he is perplext with these differences, vse
this experiment, hee shall take a good lumpe of that earth whose
temperature hee would know, and working it with water and his wet
hands, like a peece of past, he shall then as it were make a cake
thereof, and laying it before an hot fire, there let it lye, till all
the moisture be dried & backt out of it, then taking it into your hands
and breaking it in peeces, if betweene your fingers it moulder and fall
into a small dust, then be assured it is a loose, simple, and
vncompounded earth, but if it breake hard and firme, like a stone, and
when you crumble it betweene your fingers it be rough, greetie, and
shining, then be assured it is a compounded fast-binding earth, and is
compounded of clay and sand, and if in the baking it doe turne red or
redish, it is compounded of a gray clay and red sand, but if it be
browne or blewish, then it is a blacke clay & white sand, but if when
you breake it you finde therein many small pibles, then the mixture is
clay and grauell. Now there be some mixt soyles, after they are thus
bak't, although they be hard and binding, yet they will not be so
exceeding hard and stone-like as other soyles will be, and that is where
the mixture is vnequall, as where the clay is more then the sand, or the
sand more then the clay.
When you haue by this experiment found out the nature of your earth, and
can tell whether it be simple or compounded, you shall then looke to the
fruitfulnesse thereof, which generally you shall thus distinguish.
First, that clayes, simple and of themselues vncompounded, are of all
the most fruitfull, of which, blacke is the best, that next to clayes,
your mixt earths are most fertill, and the mixture of the blacke clay
and red sand, called a hasell earth, is the best, and that your sands
are of all soyles most barraine, of which the red sand for profit hath
euer the preheminence.
Now for the generall tillage and vse of these grounds, you shall
vnderstand that the simple and vncompounded grounds, being loose and
open (if they lye free from the danger of water) the Lands may be layd
the flattest and greatest, the furrowes turned vp the largest and
closest, and the plough and plough-Irons, most large and massie, onely
those for the sandy grounds must be more slender then those for the
clayes and much more nimble, as hath beene showed before. Now for the
mixt earths, you shall lay your Lands high, round, and little, set your
furrowes vpright, open, and so small as is possible, and make your
plough and plow Irons most nimble and slender, according to the manner
before specified: and thus I conclude, that hee which knoweth the loose
earth and the binding earth, can either helpe or abate the strength of
the earth, as is needfull, and knowes how to sorte his ploughes to each
temper, knowes the ground and substance of all tillage.
CHAP. IIII.
_Of the planting or setting of Corne, and the profit thereof._
Not that I am conceited, or carried away with any nouelty or strange
practise, vnusually practised in this kingdome, or that I will ascribe
vnto my selfe to giue any iudiciall approbation or allowance to things
mearely vnfrequented, doe I publish, within my booke, this relation of
the setting of Corne, but onely because I would not haue our English
Husbandman to be ignorant of any skill or obscure faculty which is
either proper to his profession, or agreeable with the fertillitie and
nature of our clymates, and the rather, since some few yeeres agoe, this
(as it then appeared secret) being with much admiration bruted through
the kingdome, in so much that according to our weake accustomed
dispositions (which euer loues strange things best) it was held so
worthy, both for generall profit and perticular ease, that very fein
(except the discreet) but did not alone put it in practise, but did euen
ground strong beleifes to raise to themselues great common-wealthes by
the profits thereof; some not onely holding insufficient arguments, in
great places, of the invtilitie of the plough, but euen vtterly
contemning the poore cart Iade, as a creature of no necessitie, so that
Poulters and Carriers, were in good hope to buy Horse-flesh as they
bought egges, at least fiue for a penie; but it hath proued otherwise,
and the Husbandman as yet cannot loose the Horses seruice. But to
proceede to the manner of setting or planting of Corne, it is in this
manner.
{SN: Of setting Wheate.}
Hauing chosen out an aker of good Corne ground, you shall at the
beginning of March, appoint at least sixe diggers or laborers with
spades to digge vp the earth gardenwise, at least a foote and three
inches deepe (which is a large spades graft) and being so digged vp, to
rest till Iune, and then to digge it ouer againe, and in the digging to
trench it and Manure it, as for a garden mould, bestowing at least
sixteene Waine-load of Horse or Oxe Manure vpon the aker, and the Manure
to be well couered within the earth, then so to let it rest vntill the
beginning of October, which being the time for the setting, you shall
then digge it vp the third time, and with rakes and beetells breake the
moulde somewhat small, then shall you take a board of sixe foot square,
which shalbe bored full of large wimble holes, each hole standing in
good order, iust sixe inches one from another, then laying the board
vpon the new digged ground, you shall with a stick, made for the
purpose, through euery hole in the board, make a hole into the ground,
at least fore inches deepe, and then into euery such hole you shall drop
a Corne of Wheate, and so remouing the board from place to place, goe
all ouer the ground that you haue digged, and so set each seuerall Corne
sixe inches one from another, and then with a rake you shall rake ouer
and couer all the holes with earth, in such sort that they may not be
discerned. And herein you are to obserue by the way that a quarte of
Wheate will set your aker: which Wheate is not to be taken as it falles
out by chance when you buy it in the market, but especially culd and
pickt out of the eare, being neither the vppermost Cornes which grow in
the toppes of the eares, nor the lowest, which grow at the setting on of
the stalke, both which, most commonly are light and of small substance,
but those which are in the midst, and are the greatest, fullest, and
roundest.
{SN: Of setting Barly, or Pease.}
Now in the selfe-same sort as you dresse your ground for your Wheate, in
the selfe same manner you shall dresse your ground for Barly, onely the
first time you digge it shalbe after the beginning of May, the second
time and the Manuring about the midst of October, wherein you shall note
that to your aker of Barly earth, you shall alow at least foure and
twentie Waine-load of Manure, and the last time of your digging and
setting shalbe at the beginning of Aprill.
Now for the dressing of your earth for the setting of Pease, it is in
all things answerable to that for Barly, onely you may saue the one
halfe of your Manure, because a dosen Waine-load is sufficient, and the
time for setting them, or any other pulse, is euer about the midst of
February.
{SN: Of the profit of setting Corne.}
Now for the profit which issueth from this practise of setting of Corne,
I must needs confesse, if I shall speake simply of the thing, that is,
how many foulds it doubleth and increaseth, surely it is both great and
wonderfull: and whereas ingenerall it is reputed that an aker of set
Corne yeeldeth as much profit as nine akers of sowne Corne, for mine
owne part I haue seene a much greater increase, if euery Corne set in an
aker should bring forth so much as I haue seene to proceede from some
three or foure Cornes set in a garden, but I feare me the generalitie
will neuer hould with the particular: how euer, it is most certaine that
earth in this sort trimmed and inriched, and Corne in this sort set and
preserued, yeeldeth at least twelue-fold more commoditie then that which
by mans hand is confusedly throwne into the ground from the Hopper:
whence it hath come to passe that those which by a few Cornes in their
gardens thus set, seeing the innumerable increase, haue concluded a
publique profit to arise thereby to the whole kingdome, not looking to
the intricacie, trouble, and casualtie, which attends it, being such and
so insupportable that almost no Husbandman is able to vndergoe it: to
which we need no better testimony then the example of those which hauing
out of meare couetousnesse and lucre of gaine, followed it with all
greedinesse, seeing the mischiefes and inconueniences which hath
incountred their workes, haue euen desisted, and forgotten that euer
there was any such practise, and yet for mine owne part I will not so
vtterly condemne it, that I will depriue it of all vse, but rather leaue
it to the discretion of iudgement, and for my selfe, onely hould this
opinion, that though it may very wel be spared from the generall vse of
Wheat and Barly in this kingdome, yet for hastie-Pease, French Beanes,
and such like pulse, it is of necessary imployment, both in rich and
poore mens gardens. And thus much for the setting of Corne.
CHAP. V.
_Of the choice of seede-Corne, and which is best for which soyle._
Hauing thus showed vnto you the seuerall soyles and temperatures of our
English land, together with the order of Manuring, dressing and tillage
of the same, I thinke it meete (although I haue in generall writ
something already touching the seede belonging to euery seuerall earth)
now to proceede to a particular election and choice of seede-Corne, in
which there is great care and diligence to be vsed: for as in Men,
Beasts, Fowle, & euery mouing thing, there is great care taken for the
choice of the breeders, because the creatures bred doe so much
participate of the parents that for the most part they are seene not
onely to carry away their outward figures and semblances, but euen their
naturall conditions and inclinations, good issuing from good, and euill
from euill: so in the choise of seede-Corne, if their be any neglect or
carelessenesse, the crop issuing of such corrupt seede must of force
bring forth a more corrupt haruest, by as much as it exceedeth in the
multiplication.
{SN: The choise of seede Wheate.}
To proceede therefore to the choise of seede-Corne, I will begin with
Wheate, of which there are diuers kindes, as your whole straw Wheate,
the great browne Pollard, the white Pollard, the Organe or red Wheate,
the flaxen Wheate, and the chilter Wheate. Your whole straw Wheate, and
browne Pollard, are knowne, the first, by his straw, which is full of
pith, and hath in it no hollownesse (whence it comes that Husbandmen
esteeme it so much for their thacking, allowing it to be as good and
durable as reede:) the latter is knowne by his eare, which is great,
white, and smooth, without anes or beard vpon it: in the hand they are
both much like one to another, being of all Wheates the biggest,
roundest and fullest: they be somewhat of a high colour, and haue vpon
them a very thicke huske, which making the meale somewhat browne causeth
the Baker not all together to esteeme them for his purest manchet, yet
the yeeld of flower which cometh from them is as great and greater then
any other Wheate whatsoeuer. These two sortes of Wheate are to be sowne
vpon the fallow field, as crauing the greatest strength and fatnesse of
ground, whence it comes that they are most commonly seene to grow vpon
the richest and stiffest blacke clayes, being a graine of that strength
that they will seldome or neuer mildew or turne blacke, as the other
sortes of Wheate will doe, if the strength of the ground be not abated
before they be throwne into the earth. Now for the choise of these two
Wheates, if you be compelled to buy them in the market, you must regard
that you buy that which is the cleanest and fairest, being vtterly
without any weedes, as darnell, cockell, tares or any other foulnesse
whatsoeuer: you shall looke that the Wheate, as neare as may be, hould
all of one bignesse and all of one colour, for to beholde it contrary,
that is to say, to see some great Cornes, some little, some high
coloured, some pale, so that in their mixture they resemble changeable
taffata, is an apparant signe that the Corne is not of one kinde but
mixt or blended, as being partly whole-straw, partly Pollard, partly
Organe, and partly Chelter. For the flaxen, it is naturally so white
that it cannot be mixt but it may easily be discerned, and these mixt
seedes are neuer good, either for the ground or the vse of man. Againe
you shall carefully looke that neither this kinde of Wheate, nor any
other that you buy for seede be blacke at the ends, for that is a signe
that the graine comming from too rich a soyle was mildewed, and then it
will neuer be fruitfull or proue good seede, as also you shall take care
that it be not too white at the ends, showing the Corne to be as it were
of two colours, for that is a signe that the Wheate was washt and dried
againe, which vtterly confoundeth the strength of the Corne and takes
from it all abilitie of bringing forth any great encrease. Now if it be
so that you haue a crop of Wheate of your owne, so that you haue no need
of the market, you shall then picke out of your choisest sheafes, and
vpon a cleane floare gently bat them with a flaile, and not thresh them
cleane, for that Corne which is greatest, fullest, and ripest, will
first flie out of the eare, and when you haue so batted a competent
quantitie you shall then winnow it and dresse it cleane, both by the
helpe of a strong winde and open siues, and so make it fit for your
seede.
I haue seene some Husbands (and truely I haue accounted them both good
and carefull) that haue before Wheate seede time both themselues, wiues,
children, and seruants at times of best leasure, out of a great Wheate
mow or bay, to gleane or pull out of the sheafes, eare by eare, the most
principall eares, and knitting them vp in small bundells to bat them and
make their seede thereof, and questionlesse it is the best seede of all
other: for you shall be sure that therein can be nothing but the
cleanest and the best of the Corne, without any weedes or foulnesse,
which can hardly be when a man thresheth the whole sheafe, and although
some men may thinke that this labour is great and troblesome, especially
such as sowe great quantities of Wheate, yet let them thus farre
encourage themselues, that if they doe the first yeere but gleane a
bushell or two (which is nothing amongst a few persons) and sowe it vp
on good Land, the encrease of it will the next yeere goe farre in the
sowing the whole crop: for when I doe speake of this picking of Wheate,
eare by eare, I doe not intend the picking of many quarters, but of so
much as the increase thereof may amount to some quarter.
Now there is also another regarde to be had (as auailable as any of the
former) in chusing of your seede Wheate, and that is to respect the
soyle from whence you take your seede, and the soyle into which you put
it, as thus.
If the ground whereon you meane to sowe your Wheat be a rich, blacke,
clay, stiffe and full of fertillitie, you shall then (as neare as you
can) chuse your seede from the barrainest mixt earth you can finde (so
the Wheate be whole-straw or Pollard) as from a clay and grauell, or a
clay and white sand, that your seede comming from a much more barraine
earth then that wherein you put it, the strength may be as it were
redoubled, and the encrease consequently amount to a higher quantitie,
as we finde it proueth in our daylie experience; but if these barraine
soyles doe not afforde you seede to your contentment, it shall not then
be amisse (you sowing your Wheate vpon fallow or tilth ground) if you
take your seede-Wheate either from an earth of like nature to your owne,
or from any mixt earth, so that such seede come from the niams, that is,
that it hath beene sowne after Pease, as being the third crop of the
Land, and not from the fallow or tilth ground, for it is a maxiome
amongst the best Husbands (though somewhat proposterous to common sence)
bring to your rich ground seede from the barraine, and to the barraine
seede from the rich, their reason (taken from their experience) being
this, that the seede (as before I said) which prospereth vpon a leane
ground being put into a rich, doth out of that superfluitie of warmth,
strength and fatnesse, double his increase; and the seede which commeth
from the fat ground being put into the leane, hauing all the vigour,
fulnesse and iuyce of fertilnes, doth not onely defend it selfe against
the hungrinesse of the ground but brings forth increase contrary to
expectation; whence proceedeth this generall custome of good Husbands in
this Land, that those which dwell in the barraine woode Lands, heathes
and high mountaine countries of this kingdome, euer (as neere as they
can) seeke out their seede in the fruitfull low vales, and very gardens
of the earth, & so likewise those in the vales take some helpes also
from the mountaines.
Now for your other sortes of Wheate, that is to say, the white Pollard
and the Organe, they are graines nothing so great, full, and large, as
the whole straw, or browne Pollard, but small, bright, and very thinly
huskt: your Organe is very red, your Pollard somewhat pale: these two
sorts of Wheate are best to be sowne vpon the third or fourth field,
that is to say, after your Pease, for they can by no meanes endure an
ouer rich ground, as being tender and apt to sprout with small moisture,
but to mildew and choake with too much fatnesse, the soyles most apt for
them are mixt earths, especially the blacke clay and red sand, or white
clay and red sand, for as touching other mixtures of grounds, they are
for the most part so barraine, that they will but hardly bring forth
Wheate vpon their fallow field, and then much worse vpon a fourth field.
Now for any other particular choise of these two seedes, they are the
same which I shewed in the whole straw, and great Pollard. As for the
flaxen Wheate, and chilter Wheate, the first, is a very white Wheate
both inward and outward, the other a pale red or deepe yellow: they are
the least of all sorts of Wheate, yet of much more hardnes and
toughnesse in sprouting, then either the Organe or white Pollard, and
therefore desire somewhat a more richer soyle, and to that end they are
for the most part sowne vpon fallow fields, in mixt earths, of what
natures or barrainenesse soeuer, as is to be seene most generally ouer
all the South parts of this Realme: and although vncompounded sands out
of their owne natures, doe hardly bring forth any Wheate, yet vpon some
of the best sands and vpon the flintie grauels, I haue seene these two
Wheates grow in good abundance, but being seldome it is not so much to
be respected.
{SN: The choise of seede Rye.}
After your Wheate you shall make choise of your Rie, of which there is
not diuers kindes although it carrie diuers complections, as some
blackish, browne, great, full and long as that which for the most part
growes vpon the red sand, or red clay, which is three parts red sand
mixt with blacke clay, and is the best Rie: the other a pale gray Rie,
short, small, and hungry, as that which growes vpon the white sand, or
white clay and white sand, and is the worst Rie. Now you shall
vnderstand that your sand grounds are your onely naturall grounds for
Rie, as being indeede not principally apt for any other graine,
therefore when you chuse your Rie for seede, you shall chuse that which
is brownest, full, bould, and longest, you shall haue great care that it
be free from weedes or filth, sith your sand grounds, out of their owne
naturall heat, doth put forth such store of naughtie weeds, that except
a man be extraordinarily carefull, both in the choise and dressing of
his Rie, he may easily be deceiued and poyson his ground with those
weedes, which with great difficultie are after rooted out againe. Now
for your seedes to each soyle, it is euer best to sow your best sand-Rie
vpon your best clay ground, and your best clay-Rie vpon your best sand
ground, obseruing euer this generall principle, not onely in Rie, but
euen in Wheat, Barly, Pease and other graine of account, that is, euer
once in three yeeres, to change all your seede, which you shall finde
both to augment your encrease and to returne you double profit.
{SN: The choise of seede-Barly.}
Now for the choise of your seede-Barly, you shall vnderstand, that for
as much as it is a graine of the greatest vse, & most tendernesse,
therefore there is the greatest diligence to be vsed in the election
thereof. Know then that of Barly there be diuers sorts, as namely, that
which wee call our common Barly, being long eares with two rankes of
Corne, narrow, close, and vpright: another called spike or
batteldore-Barly, being a large eare with two rankes of Corne, broad,
flat, and in fashion of a batteldore: and the third called beane-Barly,
or Barly big, being a large foure-square eare, like vnto an eare of
Wheate.
Of these three Barlyes the first is most in vse, as being most apt and
proper to euery soyle, whether it be fruitfull or barraine, in this our
kingdome, but they haue all one shape, colour and forme, except the
soyle alter them, onely the spike-Barly is most large and plentifull,
the common Barly hardest and aptest to grow, and the beane-Barly least,
palest, & tenderest, so that with vs it is more commonly seene in
gardens then in fields, although in other Countries, as in Fraunce,
Ireland, and such like, they sowe no other Barly at all, but with vs it
is of no such generall estimation, and therefore I will neither giue it
precedencie nor speake of it, otherwise then to referre it to the
discreation of him who takes delight in many practises: but for the
common Barly, or spike-Barly, which our experience findes to be
excellent and of great vse, I will knit them in one, and write, my full
opinion of them, for their choise in our seede. You shall know then that
when you goe into the market to chuse Barly for your seede, you shall to
your best power elect that which is whitest, fullest, and roundest,
being as the ploughman calles it, a full bunting Corne, like the nebbe
or beake of a Bunting, you shall obserue that it be all of one Corne,
and not mingled, that is, clay Barly, and sand Barly together, which you
shall distinguish by these differences: the clay Barly is of a palish,
white, yellow colour; smoth, full, large, and round, and the sand Barly
is of a deepe yellow, browne at the neather end, long, slender, and as
it were, withered, and in generall no sand Barly is principall good for
seede: but if the Barly be somewhat of a high colour, and browne at the
neather end, yet notwithstanding is very full, bould, and bigge, then it
is a signe that such Barly comes not from the sand, but rather from an
ouer fat soyle, sith the fatnesse of the earth doth euer alter the
complection of the Barly; for the whiter Barly euer the leaner soyle,
and better seede: you shall also obserue, that there be not in it any
light Corne, which is a kinde of hungry graine without substance, which
although it filleth the seeds-mans hand, yet it deceiueth the ground,
and this light Corne will commonly be amongst the best Barly: for where
the ground is so rich that it bringeth forth the Barly too rankely,
there the Corne, wanting power to stand vpon roote, falleth to the
ground, and so robde of kindly ripening, bringeth forth much light and
insufficient graine. Next this, you shall take care that in your
seede-Barly there be not any Oates, for although they be in this case
amongst Husbandmen accounted the best of weede, yet are they such a
disgrace, that euery good Husband will most diligently eschew them, and
for that cause onely will our most industrious Husbands bestow the
tedious labour of gleaning their Barly, eare by eare, by which
gleanings, in a yeere, or two, they will compasse their whole seede,
which must infallibly be without either Oates or any weede whatsoeuer:
and although some grounds, especially your richest blacke clayes, will
out of the abundance of their fruitfulnesse (as not induring to be Idle)
bring forth naturally a certaine kinde of wilde Oates, which makes some
ignorant Husbands lesse carefull of their seede, as supposing that those
wilde ones are a poisoning to their graine, but they are infinetly
deceiued: for such wilde Oates, wheresoeuer they be, doe shake and fall
away long before the Barly be ready, so that the Husbandman doth carry
of them nothing into the Barne, but the straw onely. Next Oates, you
must be carefull that there be in your Barly no other foule weede: for
whatsoeuer you sow, you must looke for the increase of the like nature,
and therefore as before I said in the Wheate, so in the Barly, I would
wish euery good Husband to imploy some time in gleaning out of his Mow
the principall eares of Barly, which being batted, drest, and sowne, by
it selfe, albeit no great quantitie at the first, yet in time it may
extend to make his whole seede perfect, and then hee shall finde his
profit both in the market, where hee shall (for euery vse) sell with the
deerest, and in his owne house where he shall finde his yeeld redoubled.
Now for fitting of seuerall seedes to seuerall soyles, you shall
obserue, that the best seede-Barly for your clay field, is ninam Barly,
sowne vpon the clay field, that is to say, Barly which is sowne where
Barly last grew, or a second crop of Barly: for the ground hauing his
pride abated in the first croppe, the second, though it be nothing neere
so much in quantitie, yet that Corne which it doth bring forth is most
pure, most white, most full, and the best of all seedes whatsoeuer, and
as in case of this soyle, so in all other like soyles which doe hould
that strength or fruitfulnesse in them that they are either able of
themselues, or with some helpe of Manure in the latter end of the yeere,
to bring forth two croppes of Barly, one after the other: but if either
your soyle deny you this strength, or the distance of place bereaue you
of the commoditie thereof, then you shall vnderstand that Barly from a
hasell ground is the best seede, for the clay ground, and Barly from the
clay ground is the best seede, not onely for the hasell earth, but euen
for all mixt earths whatsoeuer, and the Barly which proceedes from the
mixt earths is the best seede for all simple and vncompounded sands or
grauells, as wee finde, both by their increasings and dayly experience.
{SN: The choise of seede-Beanes, Pease, and Pulse.}
Now for the choise of seede-Beanes, Pease, or other Pulse, the scruple
is nothing neere so great as of other seedes, because euery one that
knowes any graine, can distinguish them when hee sees them: besides they
are of that massie waight, and so well able to indure the strength of
the winde, that they are easie to be seuered from any weede or filth
whatsoeuer: it resteth therefore that I onely giue you instruction how
to imploy them.
You shall vnderstand therefore, that if your soyle be a stiffe, blacke,
rich, clay, that then your best seede is cleane Beanes, or at the least
three partes Beanes, and but one part Pease: if it be a gray, or white
clay, then Beanes and Pease equally mixt together: if the best mixt
earths, as a blacke clay and red sand, blacke clay and white sand, or
white clay and red sand, then your seede must be cleane Pease onely: if
it be white clay and white sand, blacke clay and blacke sand, then your
seede must be Pease and Fitches mixt together: but if it be grauell or
sand simple, or grauell and sand compounded, then your seede must be
either cleane Fitches, cleane Bucke, or cleane Tares, or else Fitches,
Bucke and Tares mixt together.
{SN: The choise of seede-Oates.}
Now to conclude with the choise of your Oates. You shall vnderstand that
there be diuers kindes of them, as namely, the great long white Oate,
the great long blacke Oate, the cut Oate, and the skegge: the two first
of these are knowne by their greatnesse and colours, for they are long,
full, bigge, and smooth, and are fittest to be sowne vpon the best of
barraine grounds, for sith Oates are the worst of graine, I will giue
them no other prioritie of place. The next of these, which is the cut
Oate, it is of a pale yealow colour, short, smooth, and thicke, the
increase of them is very great, and they are the fittest to be sowne
vpon the worst of best grounds, for most commonly where you see them,
you shall also see both good Wheate, good Barly, and good Beanes and
Pease also. Now for the skegge Oate, it is a little, small, hungry,
leane Oate, with a beard at the small end like a wilde Oate, and is good
for small vse more then Pullen onely: it is a seede meete for the
barrainest and worst earth, as fit to grow but there where nothing of
better profit will grow. And thus much for those seedes which are apt
and in vse in our English soyles: wherein if any man imagine me guiltie
of errour, in that I haue omitted particularly to speake of the seede of
blend-Corne, or Masline, which is Wheate and Rye mixt together, I
answere him, that sith I haue shewed him how to chuse both the best
Wheate and the best Rye, it is an easie matter to mixe them according to
his owne discretion.
CHAP. VI.
_Of the time of Haruest and the gathering in of Corne._
{SN: The getting in of Masline.}
{SN: The getting in of Wheate.}
Next vnto plowing, it is necessary that I place Reaping, sith it is the
end, hope, and perfection of the labour, and both the merit and
incouragement which maketh the toyle both light and portable: then to
proceede vnto the time of Haruest. You shall vnderstand that it is
requisite for euery good Husband about the latter end of Iuly, if the
soyle wherein he liueth be of any hot temper, or about the beginning of
August, if it be of temperate warmth, with all dilligence constantly to
beholde his Rye, which of all graines is the first that ripeneth, and if
he shall perceiue that the hull of the eare beginneth to open, and that
the blacke toppes of the Corne doth appeare, he may then be assured that
the Corne is fully ripe, and ready for the Sickle, so that instantly he
shall prouide his Reapers, according to the quantitie of his graine: for
if hee shall neglect his Rye but one day more then is fit, it is such a
hasty graine, that it will shale forth of the huske to the ground, to
the great losse of the Husbandman. When hee hath prouided his shearers,
which he shall be carefull to haue very good, he shall then looke that
neither out of their wantonnesse nor emulation, they striue which shall
goe fastest, or ridd most ground, for from thence proceedeth many errors
in their worke, as namely, scattering, and leauing the Corne vncut
behind them, the cutting the heads of the Corne off so that they are not
possible to be gathered, and many such like incommodities, but let them
goe soberly and constantly, and sheare the Rye at least fourteene inches
aboue the ground. Then he must looke that the gatherers which follow the
Reapers doe also gather cleane, & the binders binde the Sheafes fast
from breaking, then if you finde that the bottomes of the Sheafes be
full of greenes, or weedes, it shall not be amisse to let the Sheafes
lye one from another for a day, that those greenes may wither, but if
you feare any Raine or foule weather, which is the onely thing which
maketh Rye shale, then you shall set it vp in Shockes, each Shocke
containing at least seauen Sheafes, in this manner: first, you shall
place foure Sheafes vpright close together, and the eares vpwards, then
you shall take other three Sheafes and opening them and turning the
eares downeward couer the other foure Sheafes that stoode vpwards, and
so let them stand, vntill you may with good conueniencie lead them home,
which would be done without any protraction. Next after your cleane Rye,
you shall in the selfe-same sort reape your blend-Corne, or Masline: and
albeit your Wheate will not be fully so ripe as your Rye, yet you shall
not stay your labour, being well assured that your Rye is ready, because
Wheate will harden of it selfe after it is shorne, with lying onely.
After you haue got in your Rye and blend-Corne, you shall then looke
vnto your cleane Wheate, and taking heare and there an eare thereof,
rubbe them in your hand, and if you finde that the Corne hath all
perfection saue a little hardning onely, you shall then forthwith set
your Reapers vnto it, who shall sheare it in all things as they did
sheare your Rye, onely they shall not put it in Shockes for a day or
more, but let the Sheafes lye single, that the winde and Sunne may both
wither the greenes, and harden the Corne: which done, you shall put the
Sheafes into great Shockes, that is to say, at least twelue or
foureteene Sheafes in a Shocke, the one halfe standing close together
with the eares vpward, the other halfe lying crosse ouerthwart those
eares, and their eares downeward, and in this sort you shall let your
Wheate stand for at least two dayes before you lead it.
Now it is a custome in many Countries of this kingdome, not to sheare
their Wheate, but to mow it, but in my conceit and in generall
experience, it is not so good: for it both maketh the Wheate foule, and
full of weede, and filleth vp a great place with little commoditie, as
for the vse of thacking, which is the onely reason of such disorderly
cutting, there is neither the straw that is shorne, nor the stubble
which is left behinde, but are both of sufficiencie inough for such an
imployment, if it passe through the hands of a workman, as we see in
dayly experience.
{SN: The getting in of Barly.}
Next to your Wheate, you shall haue regard to your Barly, for it
sodainely ripeneth, and must be cut downe assoone as you perceiue the
straw is turned white, to the bottome, and the eares bended downe to the
groundward. Your Barly you shall not sheare, although it is a fashion in
some Country, both because it is painefull and profitlesse, but you
shall Mowe it close to the ground, and although in generall it be the
custome of our kingdome, after your Barly is mowen and hath lyne a day
or two in swathe, then with rackes to racke it together, and make it
into great cockes, and so to leade it to the Barne, yet I am of this
opinion that if your Barly be good and cleane without thistles or
weedes, that if then to euery sitheman, or Mower you alot two followers,
that is to say, a gatherer, who with a little short rake and a small
hooke shall gather the Corne together, and a binder, who shall make
bands and binde vp the Barly in smale Sheafes, that questionlesse you
shall finde much more profit thereby: and although some thinke the
labour troublesome and great, yet for mine owne part, I haue seene very
great croppes inned in this manner, and haue seene two women, that with
great ease, haue followed and bound after a most principall Mower, which
made me vnderstand that the toyle was not so great as mine imagination;
and the profit ten-fold greater then the labour: but if your Corne be
ill Husbanded, and full of thistles, weedes, and all filthinesse, then
this practise is to be spared, and the loose cocking vp of your Corne is
much better. Assoone as you haue cleansed any Land of Barly, you shall
then immediatly cause one with a great long rake, of at least thirtie
teeth, being in a sling bound bauticke-wise crosse his body, to draw it
from one end of the Land to the other, all ouer the Land, that he may
thereby gather vp all the loose Corne which is scattered, and carry it
where your other Corne standeth, obseruing euer, as your cheifest rule,
that by no meanes you neither leade Barly, nor any other graine
whatsoeuer, when it is wet, no although it be but moistned with the dew
onely: for the least dankishnesse, more then the sweate which it
naturally taketh, will soone cause it to putrifie.
{SN: The getting in of Oates.}
Now for the gathering in of your Oates, they be a graine of such
incertaintie, ripening euer according to the weather, & not after any
setled or naturall course, that you are to looke to no constant season,
but to take them vpon the first show of ripenesse, and that with such
diligence that you must rather take them before, then after they be
ripe, because if they tarry but halfe a day too long, they will shed
vpon the ground, & you shal loose your whole profit. The time then
fittest to cut your Oates is, assoone as they be somewhat more then
halfe changed, but not altogether changed, that is, when they are more
then two parts white, and yet the greene not vtterly extinguished, the
best cutting of them is to mow them (albeit I haue seene them shorne in
some places) & being mowen to let them dry and ripen in the swathe, as
naturally they will doe, and then if you bind them vp in Sheafes, as you
should binde your Barly, it is best: for to carry them in the loose
cocke, as many doe, is great losse and hindrance of profit.
{SN: The getting in of Pulse.}
After you haue got in your white Corne, you shall then looke vnto your
Pulse, as Beanes, Pease, Fitches, and such like, which you shall know to
be ready by the blacknesse of the straw: for it is a rule, whensoeuer
the straw turnes, the Pulse is ripe. If then it be cleane Beanes, or
Beanes and Pease mixt, you shall mowe them, and being cleane Beanes rake
them into heapes, and so make them vp into cockes, but if they be mixt
you shall with hookes fould the Beanes into the Pease, and make little
round reapes thereof, which after they haue beene turned and dryed, you
may put twenty reapes together, and thereof make a cocke, and so lead
them, and stacke them: but if they be cleane Pease, or Pease and
Fitches, then you shall not mowe them, but with long hookes cut them
from the ground, which is called Reaping, and so foulding them together
into small reapes, as you did your Pease and Beanes, let them be turned
and dryed, and so cocked, and carried either to the Barne, stacke, or
houell.
Now hauing thus brought in, and finished your Haruest, you shall then
immediately mowe vp the stubble, both of your Wheate, Rye, and Masline,
and with all expedition there-with thacke, and couer from Raine and
weather, all such graine as for want of house-roome, you are compeld to
lay abroad, either in stacke, or vpon houell: but if no such necessitie
be, and that you haue not other more necessary imployment for your
stubble, it shall be no part of ill Husbandry to let the stubble rot
vpon the Land, which will be a reasonable Manuring or fatting of the
earth.
Now hauing brought your Corne into the Barne, it is a lesson needlesse
to giue any certaine rules how to spend or vtter it forth, sith euery
man must be ruled according to his affaires, and necessitie, yet sith in
mine owne experience I haue taken certaine setled rules from those who
haue made themselues great estates by a most formall and strickt course
in their Husbandry, I thinke it not amisse to show you what I haue noted
from them, touching the vtterance and expence of their graine: first,
for your expence in your house, it is meete that you haue euer so much
of euery seuerall sort of graine thresht, as shall from time to time
maintaine your family: then for that which you intend shall returne to
particular profit, you shall from a fortnight before Michaelmas, till a
fortnight after, thresh vp all such Wheate, Rye, & Masline, as you
intend to sell for seede, which must be winnowed, fand, and drest so
cleane as is possible, for at that time it will giue the greatest price;
but as soone as seede-time is past, you shall then thresh no more of
those graines till it be neare Midsummer, but begin to thresh vp all
such Barly as you intend to conuert and make into Malt, and so from
Michaelmas till Candlemas, apply nothing but Malting, for in that time
graine is euer the cheapest, because euery Barne being full, some must
sell for the payment of rents, some must sell to pay seruants wages, and
some for their Christmas prouisions: in which time Corne abating and
growing scarse, the price of necessitie must afterwards rise: at
Candlemas you shall begin to thresh all those Pease which you intend to
sell for seede, because the time being then, and euery man, out of
necessitie, inforced to make his prouision, it cannot be but they must
needes passe at a good price and reckoning.
After Pease seede-time, you shall then thresh vp all that Barly which
you meane to sell for seede, which euer is at the dearest reckoning of
any graine whatsoeuer, especially if it be principally good and cleane.
After your seede-Barly is sould, you may then thresh vp all such Wheate,
Rye, and Masline, as you intend to sell: for it euer giueth the greatest
price from the latter end of May vntill the beginning of September. In
September you shall begin to sell your Malt, which being old and hauing
lyne ripening the most part of the yeere, must now at the latter end of
the yeere, when all old store is spent, and the new cannot be come to
any perfection, be most deare, and of the greatest estimation: and thus
being a man of substance in the world, and able to put euery thing to
the best vse, you may by these vsuall obseruations, and the helpe of a
better iudgement, imploy the fruits of your labours to the best profit,
and sell euery thing at the highest price, except you take vpon you to
giue day and sell vpon trust, which if you doe, you may then sell at
what vnconscionable reckoning you will, which because such vnnaturall
exactions neither agree with charitie, nor humanitie, I will forbeare to
giue rules for the same, and referre euery man that is desirous of such
knowledge, to the examples of the world, wherein he shall finde
presidents inough for such euill customes. And thus much for the first
part of this worke, which containeth the manner of Plowing and tillage
onely.
THE SECOND PART
OF THE FIRST BOOKE OF
the English Husbandman,
Contayning the Art of Planting, Grafting and Gardening, either for
pleasure or profit; together with the vse and ordering of Woodes.
CHAP. I.
_Of the Scyte, Modell, Squares, and Fashion of a perfect Orchard._
Although many authors which I haue read, both in Italian, French, and
Dutch, doe make a diuersitie and distinguishment of Orchardes, as
namely, one for profit, which they fashion rudely and without forme, the
other for delight, which they make comely, decent, and with all good
proportion, deuiding the quarters into squares, making the alleyes of a
constant breadth, and planting the fruit-trees in arteficiall rowes: yet
for as much as the comelinesse and well contriuing of the ground, doth
nothing abate, but rather increase the commoditie, I will therefore
ioyne them both together, and make them onely but one Orchard. Now for
the scyte and placing of this Orchard, I haue in the modell of my
Country house, or Husbandmans Farme, shewed you where if it be possible
it should stand, and both what Sunne & ayre it should lye open vpon: but
if the scyte or ground-plot of your house will not giue you leaue to
place your Orchard according to your wish, you shall then be content to
make a vertue of necessitie, and plant it in such a place as is most
conuenient, and nearest alyed to that forme before prescribed.
{Illustration}
Now when you haue found out a perfect ground-plot, you shall then cast
it into a great large square, which you shall fence in either with a
stone or bricke wall, high, strong pale, or great ditch with a
quicke-set hedge, but the wall is best and most durable, and that wall
would haue vpon the inside within twelue or fourteene foote on of
another, Iames or outshoots of stone or bricke, betweene which you may
plant and plash those fruit-trees which are of greatest tendernesse, the
South and West Sunne hauing power to shine vpon them.
When you haue thus fenc'st in this great square, you shall then cast
foure large alleyes, at least fourteene foote broad, from the wall round
about, and so likewise two other alleyes of like breadth, directly
crosse ouerthwart the ground-plot, which will deuide the great square
into foure lesser squares, according to the figure before set downe.
The figure 1. sheweth the alleyes which both compasse about, and also
crosse ouer the ground-plot, and the figure 2. sheweth the foure
quarters where the fruit-trees are to be planted.
Now if either the true nature and largnesse of the ground be sufficient,
or your owne abilitie of pursse so great that you may compasse your
desires in these earthly pleasures, it shall not be amisse, but a matter
of great state, to make your ground-plot full as bigge againe, that is
to say, to containe eight large quarters, the first foure being made of
an euen leuell, the other foure being raysed at least eight foote higher
then the first, with conuenient stayres of state for ascending to the
same, to be likewise vpon another euen leuell of like forme, and if in
the center of the alleyes, being the mid-point betweene the squares,
might be placed any quaint fountaines or any other antique standard, the
platforme would be more excellent and if vpon the ascent from one leuell
to another there might be built some curious and arteficiall banquetting
house, it would giue luster to the Orchard.
Now for the planting and furnishing of these quarters: you shall
vnderstand that if your Orchard containe but foure quarters, then the
first shalbe planted with Apple-trees of all sorts, the second with
Peares and Wardens of all sorts, the third with Quinces & Chesnutes, the
fourth with Medlars & seruices. Against the North side of your Orchard
wall against which the South sunne reflects, you shall plant the
Abricot, Verdochio, Peach, and Damaske-plumbe: against the East side of
the wall, the whit Muskadine Grape, the Pescod-plumbe, and the
Emperiall-plumbe: against the West side the grafted Cherries, and the
Oliue-tree: and against the South side the Almond, & Figge tree. Round
about the skirts of euery other outward or inward alley, you shall
plant, the Wheate-plumbe, both yealow & redde, the Rye-plumbe, the
Damson, the Horse-clog, Bulleys of all kindes, ordinary french Cherryes,
Filberts, and Nuts of all sorts, together with the Prune-plumbe, and
other such like stone fruits. But if your Orchard be of state and
prospect, so that it containe eight quarters or more (according to the
limitation of the earth) then you shall in euery seuerall quarter plant
a seuerall fruit, as Apple-trees in one quarter, Peares in another,
Quinces in another, Wardens in another, and so forth of the rest. Also
you shall obserue in planting your Apples, Peares, and Plumbes, that you
plant your summer or early fruit by themselues, and the Winter or long
lasting fruit by themselues. Of Apples, your Ienitings, Wibourns,
Pomederoy, and Queene-Apples are reckoned the best earely fruits,
although their be diuers others, and the Pippin, Peare-maine,
Apple-Iohn, and Russetting, your best Winter and long lasting fruit,
though there be a world of other: for the tastes of Apples are infinite,
according to there composition and mixture in grafting. Of Peares your
golden Peare, your Katherine-Peare, your Lording, and such like, are the
first, and your stone-Peare, Warden-Peare, and choake-Peare, those which
indure longest. And of Plumbes the rye-plumbe is first, your
Wheate-plumbe next, and all the other sorts of plumbes ripen all most
together in one season, if they haue equall warmth, and be all of like
comfortable standing.
{Illustration}
Now for the orderly placing of your trees, you shall vnderstand that
your Plumbe-trees (which are as it were a fence or guard about your
great quarters) would be placed in rowes one by one, aboue fiue foote
distance one from another, round about each skirt of euery alley: your
Apple-trees & other greater fruit which are to be planted in the
quarters, would be placed in such arteficiall rowes that which way
soeuer a man shall cast his eyes yet hee shall see the trees euery way
stand in rowes, making squares, alleyes, and deuisions, according to a
mans imagination, according to the figure before, which I would haue
you suppose to be one quarter in an Orchard, and by it you may easily
compound the rest: wherein you shall vnderstand that the lesser prickes
doe figure your Plumbe-trees, & the greater prickes your Apple trees,
and such other large fruit.
Now you shall vnderstand that euery one of these great trees which
furnish the maine quarter, shall stand in a direct line, iust twelue
foote one from another, which is a space altogether sufficient inough
for there spreading, without waterdropping or annoying one another;
prouided that the Fruiterer, according to his duty, be carefull to
preserue the trees vpright and to vnderprope them when by the violence
of the winde they shall swarue any way. Vpon the ascent or rising from
one leuell to another, you may plant the Barberry-trees, Feberries, and
Raspberries, of all sorts, which being spreading, thorny and sharpe
trees, take great delight to grow thicke and close together, by which
meanes often times they make a kinde of wall, hedge, or fencing, where
they stand.
Hauing thus shewed you the ground-plot and proportion of your Orchard,
with the seuerall deuisions, ascents, and squares, that should be
contained therein, and the fruits which are to furnish euery such square
and deuision, and their orderly placing, it now rests that you
vnderstand that this Orchard-plot, so neare as you can bring it to
passe, doe stand most open and plaine, vpon the South and West sunne,
and most defended from the East and North windes and bitternesse, which
being obserued your plot is then perfect and absolute.
Now forasmuch as where nature, fruitfulnesse, and situation doe take
from a man more then the halfe part of his industrie, and by a direct
and easie way doth lead him to that perfection which others cannot
attaine to without infinit labour and trauell: and whereas it is nothing
so commendable to maintaine beautie, as to make deformitie beautifull, I
will speake something of the framing of Orchard-plots there where both
nature, the situation, and barrainnesse, doe vtterly deny the enioying
of any such commoditie, as where the ground is vneuen, stonie, sandy, or
in his lownesse subiect to the ouerflow of waters, all being apparant
enemies to these places of pleasure and delight. First, for the
vneuennesse of the ground, if that be his vttermost imperfection, you
shall first not onely take a note with your eye, but also place a marke
vpon the best ascent of the ground to which the leuell is fittest to be
drawne, and then plowing the ground all ouer with a great common plough,
by casting the furrowes downward, seeke to fill in and couer the lesser
hollownesses of the ground, that their may not any thing appeare but the
maine great hollowes, which with other earth which is free from stones,
grauell, or such like euils, you shall fill vp and make leuell with that
part where your marke standeth, and being so leuelled, forthwith draw
the plot of your Orchard: but if the ground be not onely vneuen but also
barraine, you shall then to euery loade of earth you carry to the
leuelling adde a loade of Manure, either Oxe Manure, or Horse Manure,
the rubbish of houses, or the clensings of olde ditches, or standing
pooles, and the earth will soone become fertill and perfect; but if the
ground be stonie, that is, full of great stones, as it is in Darbishire
about the Peake or East Mores, for small pibbles or small lime-stones
are not very much hurtfull, then you shall cause such stones to be digd
vp, and fill vp the places where they lay either with marle, or other
rich earth, which after it hath beene setled for a yeere or two you
shall then plough, and leuell it, and so frame forth the plot of your
Orchard. If the ground be onely a barraine sand, so that it wanteth
strength either to maintaine or bring forth, you shall then first digge
that earth into great trenches, at least foure foote deepe, and filling
them vp with Oxe Manure, mixe it with the sand, that it may change some
part of the colour thereof and then leuelling it fashion out your
Orchard. But lastly, and which is of all situations the worst, if you
haue no ground to plant your Orchard vpon, but such as either through
the neighbourhood of riuers, descent of Mountaines, or the earths owne
naturall quallitie in casting and vomiting out water and moysture, is
subiect to some small ouerflowes of water, by which you cannot attaine
to the pleasure you seeke, because fruit-trees can neuer indure the
corruption of waters, you shall then in the dryest season of the yeere,
after you haue marked out that square or quantitie of ground which you
intend for your Orchard, you shall then cast therein sundry ditches, at
least sixteene foote broad, and nine foote deepe, and not aboue twelue
foote betwixt ditch and ditch, vpon which reserued earth casting the
earth that you digged vp, you shall raise the banckes at least seauen
foote high of firme earth, and keepe in the top the full breadth of
twelue foote, with in a foote or little more: and in the casting vp of
these bankes you shall cause the earth to be beaten with maules and
broad beetels that it may lye firme, fast, and leuell, and after these
bankes haue rested a yeere or more, and are sufficiently setled, you may
then at the neather end of the banke, neare to the verge of the water
plant store of Osyers, which will be a good defence to the banke, and
vpon the top and highest part of the banke you shall plant your Orchard
and fruit-trees, so that when any inundation of water shall happen, the
ditches shalbe able inough to receiue it; or else making a passage from
your Orchard into some other sewer, the water exceeding his limits may
haue a free current or passage: besides these ditches being neatly kept,
and comforted with fresh water, may make both pleasant and commodious
fish-ponds. Also you must be carefull in casting these bankes that you
doe not place them in such sort that when you are vpon one you cannot
come to the other, but rather like a maze, so that you may at pleasure
passe from the one to the other round about the ground, making of diuers
bankes to the eye but one banke in substance, and of diuers ponds in
appearance, but one in true iudgement. And thus much for the plot or
situation of an Orchard.
CHAP. II.
_Of the Nurserie where you shall set all manner of Kernels, and Stones,
for the furnishing of the Orchard._
Although great persons, out of their greatnesse and abilitie, doe buy
their fruit trees ready grafted, and so in a moment may plant an Orchard
of the greatest quantitie, yet sith the Husbandman must raise euery
thing from his owne indeauours, and that I onely write for his profit, I
therefore hould it most conuenient to beginne with the nursery or
store-house of fruits, from whence the Orchard receiueth his beauty and
riches.
This Nursery must be a piece of principall ground, either through Art or
Nature, strongly fenced, warme, and full of good shelter: for in it is
onely the first infancy and tendernesse of fruit-trees, because there
they are first kernells, or stones, after sprigs, and lastly trees.
Now for the manner of chusing, sowing, and planting them in this
nursery, I differ some thing from the french practise, who would chuse
the kernells from the cider presse, sow them in large bedds of earth,
and within a yeere after replant them in a wilde Orchard: now for mine
owne part, though this course be not much faulty, yet I rather chuse
this kinde of practise, first: to chuse your kernells either of Apples,
Peares, or Wardens, from the best and most principallest fruit you can
taste, for although the kernell doe bring forth no other tree but the
plaine stocke vpon which the fruit was grafted, as thus, if the graft
were put into a Crab-stocke the kernell brings forth onely a Crab-tree,
yet when you taste a perfect and delicate Apple, be assured both the
stocke and graft were of the best choise, and so such kernells of best
reckoning. When you haue then a competent quantitie of such kernells,
you shall take certaine large pots, in the fashion of milke-boules, all
full of hoales in the bottome, through which the raine and superfluous
moysture may auoyde, and either in the Months of March or Nouember (for
those are the best seasons) fill the pots three parts full of the
finest, blackest, and richest mould you can get, then lay your kernells
vpon the earth, about foure fingars one from another, so many as the
vessell can conueniently containe, and then with a siue sift vpon them
other fine moulds almost three fingars thicke, and so let them rest,
filling so many pots or vessells as shall serue to receiue your
quantitie of kernells of all sorts. Now if any man desire to know my
reason why I rather desire to set my kernells rather in vessells then in
beds of earth, my answere is, that I haue often found it in mine
experience, that the kernell of Apples, Peares, Quinces, and such like,
are such a tender and dainty seede that it is great oddes but the wormes
will deuoure and consume them before they sprout, who naturally delight
in such seedes, which these vessels onely doe preuent: but to proceede.
After your kernells are sprouted vp and growne to be at least seauen or
eight inches high, you shall then within your nursery digge vp a border
about two foote and an halfe broad, more then a foote deepe, and of such
conuenient length as may receiue all your young plants, and hauing made
the mould fine and rich with Manure, you shall then with your whole hand
gripe as much of the earth that is about the plant as you can
conueniently hould, and so take both the plant and the mould out of the
vessell, and replant it in the new drest border: and you shall thus doe
plant after plant, till you haue set euery one, and made them firme and
fast in the new mould: wherein you are to obserue these two principles,
first that you place them at least fiue foote one from another, and
secondly, that such kernells as you set in your vessels in March, that
you replant them in borders of earth in Nouember following, and such as
you set in Nouember to replant in March following, and being so
replanted to suffer them to grow till they be able to beare grafts,
during which time you shall diligently obserue, that if any of them
chance to put forth any superfluous branches or cyons, which may hinder
the growth of the body of the plant, that you carefully cut them away,
that thereby it may be the sooner inabled to beare a graft: for it is
euer to be intended that whatsoeuer proceedeth from kernells are onely
to be preserued for stockes to graft on, and for no other purpose.
Now for the stones of Plumbes, & other stone fruit, you shall vnderstand
that they be of two kindes, one simple and of themselues, as the
Rye-plumbe, Wheate-plumbe, Damson, Prune-plumbe, Horse-clogge, Cherry,
and such like, so that from the kernells of them issueth trees of like
nature and goodnesse: the other compounded or grafted plumbes, as the
Abricot, Pescod, Peach, Damaske, Verdochyo, Emperiall, and such like,
from whose kernells issueth no other trees but such as the stockes were
vpon which they were grafted. Now, for the manner of setting the first,
which are simple and vncompounded, you shall digge vp a large bedde of
rich and good earth a month or more before March or Nouember, and hauing
made the mould as fine as is possible, you shall flat-wise thrust euery
stone, a foote one from another, more then three fingars into the mould,
and then with a little small rake, made for the purpose, rake the bedde
ouer and close vp the holes, and so let them rest till they be of a
yeeres groath, at which time you shall replant them into seuerall
borders, as you did your Apple-tree plants and others.
Now for the kernells of your compounded or grafted Plumbes, you shall
both set them in beddes and replant them into seuerall borders, in the
same manner as you did the other kernells of Plumbes, onely you shall
for the space of eight and forty houres before you set them steepe them
in new milke, forasmuch as the stones of them are more hard, and with
greater difficulty open and sprout in the earth, then any other stone
whatsoeuer: and thus hauing furnished your Nursery of all sorts of
fruits and stockes, you shall when they come to full age and bignesse
graft them in such order as shalbe hereafter declared.
CHAP. III.
_Of the setting or planting of the Cyons or Branches of most sorts of
Fruit-trees._
As you are to furnish your nursery with all sorts of kernells and
stones, for the breeding of stockes where on to graft the daintiest
fruits you can compasse, so shall you also plant therein the cyons and
branches of the best fruit trees: which cyons and branches doe bring
forthe the same fruit which the trees doe from whence they are taken,
and by that meanes your nursery shall euer afford you perfect trees,
wherewith either to furnish your owne grounds, or to pleasure your
neighbours. And herein by the way you shall vnderstand that some trees
are more fit to be set then to be sowne, as namely, the Seruice-tree,
the Medler, the Filbert and such like. Now for the Seruice-tree, hee is
not at all to be grafted, but set in this wise: take of the bastard
cyons such as be somewhat bigger then a mans thumbe, and cutting away
the branches thereof, set it in a fine loose moulde, at least a foote
deepe, and it will prosper exceedingly, yet the true nature of this tree
is not to be remoued, and therefore it is conuenient that it be planted
where it should euer continue: in like manner to the Seruice-tree, so
you shall plant the bastard cyons of the Medlar-tree either in March or
October, and at the waine of the moone.
Now for the Filbert, or large Hassell-nut, you shall take the smallest
cyons or wands, such as are not aboue two yeeres groath, being full of
short heauie twigges, and grow from the roote of the maine tree, and set
them in a loose mould, a foote deepe, without pruning or cutting away
any of the branches, and they will prosper to your contentment. Now for
all sorts of Plumbe-trees, Apple-trees or other fruit-trees which are
not grafted, if you take the young cyons which grow from the rootes
cleane from the rootes, and plant them either in the spring, or fall, in
a fresh and fine mould, they will not onely prosper, but bring forth
fruit of like nature and qualitie to the trees from whence they were
taken.
Now for your grafted fruit, as namely, Apples, Plumbes, Cherryes,
Mulberries, Quinces, and such like, the cyons also and branches of them
also will take roote and bring forth fruit of the same kinde that the
trees did from whence they were taken: but those cyons or branches must
euer be chosen from the vpper parts of the trees, betwixt the feast of
all-Saints and Christmas, they must be bigger then a mans finger,
smooth, straight, and without twigges: you shall with a sharpe chissell
cut them from the body or armes of the tree with such care, that by no
meanes you raise vp the barke, and then with a little yealow waxe couer
the place from whence you cut the cyon: then hauing digged and dunged
the earth well where you intend to plant them, and made the mould easie,
you shall with an Iron, as bigge as your plant, make a hoale a foote
deepe or better, and then put in your cyon and with it a few Oates, long
steept in water, and so fixe it firme in the mould, and if after it
beginneth to put forth you perceiue any young cyons to put forth from
the root thereof, you shall immediatly cut them off, & either cast them
away or plant them in other places, for to suffer them to grow may
breede much hurt to the young trees. Now where as these cyons thus
planted are for the most part small and weake, so that the smallest
breath of winde doth shake and hurt their rootes, it shalbe good to
pricke strong stakes by them, to which, fastning the young plant with a
soft hay rope it may the better be defended from stormes and tempests.
Next to these fruit-trees, you shall vnderstand that your bush-trees,
as Barberryes, Gooseberryes, or Feberryes, Raspberryes, and such like,
will also grow vpon cyons, without rootes, being cut from their maine
rootes in Nouember, & so planted in a new fresh mould. And here by the
way I am to giue you this note or caueat, that if at any time you finde
any of these cyons which you haue planted not to grow and flourish
according to your desire, but that you finde a certaine mislike or
consumption in the plant, you shall then immediatly with a sharpe knife
cut the plant off slope-wise vpward, about three fingars from the
ground, and so let it rest till the next spring, at which time you shall
beholde new cyons issue from the roote, which will be without sicknesse
or imperfection; and from the vertue of this experiment I imagine the
gardners of antient time found out the meanes to get young cyons from
olde Mulberry-trees, which they doe in this manner: first, you must take
some of the greatest armes of the Mulberry-tree about the midst of
Nouember, and with a sharpe sawe to sawe them into bigge truncheons,
about fiueteene inches long, and then digging a trench in principall
good earth, of such depth that you may couer the truncheons, being set
vp on end, with Manure and fine mould, each truncheon being a foote one
from another, and couerd more then foure fingars aboue the wood, not
fayling to water them whensoeuer neede shall require, and to preserue
them from weeds and filthinesse, within lesse then a yeeres space you
shall behold those truncheons to put forth young cyons, which as soone
as they come to any groath and be twigged, then you may cut them from
the stockes, and transplant them where you please, onely the truncheons
you shall suffer to remaine still, and cherish them with fresh dunge,
and they will put forth many moe cyons, both to furnish your selfe and
your friends. And thus much for the planting and setting of cyons or
branches.
CHAP. IIII.
_Of the ordinary and accustomed manner of Grafting all sorts of
Fruit-trees._
{SN: The mixing of Stockes and Grafts.}
As soone as your nursery is thus amply furnished of all sorts of
stockes, proceeding from kernells and of all sorts of trees proceeding
from cyons, branches or vndergrowings, and that through strength of
yeeres they are growne to sufficient abilitie to receiue grafts, which
is to be intended that they must be at the least sixe or eight inches in
compasse, for although lesse many times both doth and may receiue
grafts, yet they are full of debilitie and danger, and promise no
assurance to the worke-mans labour, you shall then beginne to graft your
stockes with such fruits as from art and experience are meete to be
conioyned together, as thus: you shall graft Apples vpon Apples, as the
Pippin vpon the great Costard, the Peare-maine vpon the Ienetting, and
the Apple-Iohn or blacke annet vpon the Pomewater or Crab-tree: to
conclude, any Apple-stocke, Crab-tree, or wilding, is good to graft
Apples vpon, but the best is best worthy. So for Peares, you shall graft
them vpon Peare stockes, Quinces vpon Quinces or Crab-trees, and not
according to the opinion of the frenchman, vpon white thorne or willow,
the Medlar vpon the Seruice-tree, and the Seruice vpon the Medlar, also
Cherryes vpon Cherryes, & Plumbes vpon Plumbes, as the greater Abricots
vpon the lesser Abricots, the Peach, the Figge, or the Damson-tree, and
to speake generally without wasting more paper, or making a long
circumstance to slender purpose, the Damson-tree is the onely principall
best stocke whereupon to graft any kinde of Plumbe or stone fruit
whatsoeuer.
{SN: The choise of Grafts.}
After you haue both your stockes ready, and know which grafts to ioyne
with which stockes, you shall then learne to cut and chuse your grafts
in this manner: looke from what tree you desire to take your grafts, you
shall goe vnto the very principall branches thereof, and looke vp to the
vpper ends, and those which you finde to be fairest, smoothest, and
fullest of sappe, hauing the little knots, budds, or eyes, standing
close and thicke together, are the best and most perfect, especially if
they grow vpon the East side of the tree, whereon the Sunne first
looketh; these you shall cut from the tree in such sort that they may
haue at least three fingars of the olde woode ioyning to the young
branch, which you shall know both by the colour of the barke, as also by
a little round seame which maketh as it were a distinction betwixt the
seuerall growths. Now you shall euer, as neere as you can, chuse your
grafts from a young tree, and not from an olde, and from the tops of the
principall branches, and not from the midst of the tree, or any other
superfluous arme or cyon; now if after you haue got your grafts you haue
many dayes Iourneys to carry them, you shall fould them in a few fresh
mouldes, and binde them about with hay, and hay ropes, and so carry them
all day, and in the night bury them all ouer in the ground and they will
containe their goodnesse for a long season.
{SN: How to graft in the Cleft.}
Hauing thus prepared your grafts, you shall then beginne to graft, which
worke you shall vnderstand may be done in euery month of the yeere,
except Nouember and October, but the best is to beginne about Christmas
for all earely and forward fruit, and for the other, to stay till March:
now hauing all your implements and necessaryes about you, fit for the
Grafting, you shall first take your grafts, of what sort soeuer they be,
and hauing cut the neather ends of them round and smoth without raysing
of the barke, you shall then with a sharp knife, made in the proportion
of a great pen-knife slice downe each side of the grafts, from the seame
or knot which parts the olde woode from the new, euen to the neather
end, making it flat and thinne, cheifely in the lowest part, hauing
onely a regardfull eye vnto the pith of the graft, which you may by no
meanes cut or touch, and when you haue thus trimmed a couple of grafts,
for moe I doe by no meanes alow vnto one stocke, although sundry other
skilfull workmen in this Art alow to the least stocke two grafts, to the
indifferent great three, and to the greatest of all foure, yet I affirme
two are sufficiently inough for any stocke whatsoeuer, and albeit they
are a little the longer in couering the head, yet after they haue
couered it the tree prospereth more in one yeere then that which
contayneth foure grafts shall doe in two, because they cannot haue sap
inough to maintaine them, which is the reason that trees for want of
prosperitie grow crooked and deformed: but to my purpose. When you haue
made your grafts ready, you shall then take a fine thinne sawe, whose
teeth shalbe filed sharpe and euen, and with it (if the stocke be
exceeding small) cut the stocke round off within lesse then a foote of
the ground, but if the stocke be as bigge as a mans arme, then you may
cut it off two or three foote from the ground, and so consequently the
bigger it is the higher you may cut it, and the lesser the nearer vnto
the earth: as soone as you haue sawne off the vpper part of the stocke,
you shall then take a fine sharpe chissell, somewhat broader then the
stocke, and setting it euen vpon the midst of the head of the stocke
somewhat wide of the pith, then with a mallet of woode you shall stricke
it in and cleaue the stocke, at least foure inches deepe, then putting
in a fine little wedge of Iron, which may keepe open the cleft, you
shall take one of your grafts and looke which side of it you intend to
place inward, and that side you shall cut much thinner then the out
side, with a most heedfull circumspection that by no meanes you loosen
or rayse vp the barke of the graft, cheifly on the out side, then you
shall take the graft, and wetting it in your mouth place it in one side
of the cleft of the stocke, and regard that the very knot or seame which
goes about the graft, parting the olde woode from the new, do rest
directly vpon the head of the stocke, and that the out side of the
graft doe agree directly with the out side of the stocke, ioyning barke
vnto barke, and sappe vnto sappe, so euen, so smooth, and so close, that
no ioyners worke may be discerned to ioyne more arteficially: which
done, vpon the other side of the stocke, in the other cleft, you shall
place your other graft, with full as much care, diligence, and euery
other obseruation: when both your grafts are thus orderly and
arteficially placed, you shall then by setting the haft of your chissell
against the stocke, with all lenitie and gentlenesse, draw forth your
wedge, in such sort that you doe not displace or alter your grafts, and
when your wedge is forth you shall then looke vpon your grafts, and if
you perceiue that the stocke doe pinch or squize them, which you may
discerne both by the straitnesse and bending of the outmost barke, you
shall then make a little wedge of some greene sappy woode, and driuing
it into the cleft, ease your grafts, cutting that wedge close to the
stocke. When you haue thus made both your grafts perfect, you shall then
take the barke of either Apple-tree, Crab-tree or Willow-tree, and with
that barke couer the head of the stocke so close that no wet or other
annoyance may get betwixt it and the stocke, then you shall take a
conuenient quantitie of clay, which indeede would be of a binding
mingled earth, and tempering it well, either with mosse or hay, lay it
vpon the barke, and daube all the head of the stocke, euen as low as the
bottome of the grafts, more then an inch thicke, so firme, close, and
smooth as may be, which done, couer all that clay ouer with soft mosse,
and that mosse with some ragges of wollen cloath, which being gently
bound about with the inward barkes of Willow, or Osyar, let the graft
rest to the pleasure of the highest: and this is called grafting in the
cleft.
{SN: Notes.}
Now there be certaine obseruations or caueats to be respected in
grafting, which I may not neglect: as first, in trimming and preparing
your grafts for the stocke: if the grafts be either of Cherry, or
Plumbe, you shall not cut them so thinne as the grafts of Apples,
Quinces, or Medlars, because they haue a much larger and rounder pith,
which by no meanes must be toucht but fortefied and preserued, onely to
the neather end you may cut them as thinne as is possible, the pith
onely preserued.
Secondly, you shall into your greatest stockes put your greatest grafts,
and into your least, the least, that there may be an equall strength and
conformitie in their coniunction.
Thirdly, if at any time you be inforced to graft vpon an olde tree, that
is great and large, then you shall not graft into the body of that tree,
because it is impossible to keepe it from putrifaction and rotting
before the grafts can couer the head, but you shall chuse out some of
the principall armes or branches, which are much more slender, and graft
them, as is before shewed, omitting not dayly to cut away all cyons,
armes, branches, or superfluous sprigs which shall grow vnder those
branches which you haue newly grafted: but if there be no branch, small
or tender inough to graft in, then you shall cut away all the maine
branches from the stocke, and couering the head with clay and mosse, let
it rest, and within three or foure yeeres it will put forth new cyons,
which will be fit to graft vpon.
Fourthly, if when you either sawe off the top of your stocke, or else
cleaue the head, you either raise vp the barke or cleaue the stocke too
deepe, you shall then sawe the stocke againe, with a little more
carefulnesse, so much lower as your first errour had committed a fault.
Fiftly, you shall from time to time looke to the binding of the heads of
your stockes, in so much that if either the clay doe shrinke away or the
other couerings doe losen, by which defects ayre, or wet, may get into
the incission, you shall presently with all speede amend and repaire it.
Lastly, if you graft in any open place where cattell doe graze, you
shall not then forget as soone as you haue finisht your worke to bush or
hedge in your graft, that it may be defended from any such negligent
annoyance. And thus much for this ordinary manner of grafting, which
although it be generall and publike to most men that knoweth any thing
in this art, yet is it not inferiour, but the principallest and surest
of all other.
CHAP. V.
_Of diuers other wayes of grafting, their vses and purposes._
Although for certainty, vse, and commodity, the manner of grafting
already prescribed is of sufficiency inough to satisfie any constant or
reasonable vnderstanding, yet for nouelty sake, to which our nation is
infinitly addicted, and to satisfie the curious, who thinke their
iudgements disparaged if they heare any authorised traueller talke of
the things which they haue not practised, I will proceede to some other
more quaint manners of grafting, and the rather because they are not
altogether vnnecessary, hauing both certainety in the worke, pleasure in
the vse, and benefit in the serious imploying of those howers which else
might challenge the title of idlenesse, besides they are very well
agreeing with the soyles and fruits of this Empyre of great Brittaine
and the vnderstandings of the people, for whose seruice or benefit, I
onely vndergoe my trauell.
You shall vnderstand therefore, that there is another way to graft,
which is called grafting betweene the barke and tree, and it is to be
put in vse about the latter end of February, at such time as the sappe
beginnes to enter into the trees: and the stockes most fit for this
manner of grafting are those which are oldest and greatest, whose graine
being rough and vneuen, either through shaking or twinding, it is a
thing almost impossible to make it cleaue in any good fashion, so that
in such a case it is meete that the grafter exercise this way of
grafting betwixt the barke and the tree, the manner whereof is thus.
{SN: Grafting betweene the barke.}
First, you shall dresse your grafts in such sort as was before discribed
when you grafted in the cleft, onely they shall not be so long from the
knot or seame downeward by an inch or more, neither so thicke, but as
thinne as may be, the pith onely preserued, and at the neather end of
all you shall cut away the barke on both sides, making that end smaller
and narrower then it is at the ioynt or seame, then sawing off the head
of the stocke, you shall with a sharpe knife pare the head round about,
smooth and plaine, making the barke so euen as may be, that the barke of
your grafts and it may ioyne like one body, then take a fine narrow
chissell, not exceeding sharpe, but somewhat rebated, and thrust it hard
downe betwixt the barke and the tree, somewhat more then two inches,
according to the iust length of your graft, and then gently thrust the
graft downe into the same place, euen close vnto the ioynt, hauing great
care that the ioynt rest firme and constant vpon the head of the stocke,
and thus you shall put into one stocke not aboue three grafts at the
most, how euer either other mens practise, or your owne reading doe
perswade you to the contrary. After your grafts are fixt and placed, you
shall then couer the head with barke, clay, and mosse, as hath beene
formerly shewed: also you shall fasten about it some bushes of thorne,
or sharpe whinnes, which may defend and keepe it from the annoyance of
Pye-annats, and such like great birds.
There is another way of grafting, which is called grafting in the
scutchion, which howsoeuer it is esteemed, yet is it troublesome,
incertaine, and to small purpose: the season for it is in summer, from
May till August, at what time trees are fullest of sappe and fullest of
leaues, and the manner is thus: take the highest and the principallest
branches of the toppe of the tree you would haue grafted, and without
cutting it from the olde woode chuse the best eye and budding place of
the cyon, then take another such like eye or budde, being great and
full, and first cut off the leafe hard by the budde, then hollow it with
your knife the length of a quarter of an inch beneath the budde, round
about the barke, close to the sappe, both aboue and below, then slit it
downe twice so much wide of the budde, and then with a small sharpe
chissell raise vp the scutchion, with not onely the budde in the midst
but euen all the sappe likewise, wherein you shall first raise that side
which is next you, and then taking the scutchion betweene your fingars,
raise it gently vp without breaking or brusing, and in taking it off
hould it hard vnto the woode, to the end the sappe of the budde may
abide in the scutchion, for if it depart from the barke and cleaue to
the woode, your labour is lost, this done you shall take another like
cyon, and hauing taken off the barke from it, place it in the others
place, and in taking off this barke you must be carfull that you cut not
the woode, but the barke onely, and this done you shall couer it all
ouer with redde waxe, or some such glutenous matter; as for the binding
of it with hempe and such trumpery it is vtterly dissalowed of all good
grafters: this manner of grafting may be put in practise vpon all manner
of cyons, from the bignesse of a mans little fingar to the bignesse of a
slender arme.
{SN: Grafting with the Leafe.}
Not much vnlike vnto this, is the grafting with the Leafe, and of like
worth, the art whereof is thus: any time betwixt midst May, vntill the
midst of September, you shall chuse, from the toppe of the sunne-side of
the tree, the most principall young cyon you can see, whose barke is
smoothest, whose leaues are greatest, and whose sappe is fullest, then
cutting it from the tree note the principall leafe thereof, and cut away
from it all the woode more then about an inch of each side of the leafe,
then cutting away the vndermost part of the barke with your knife, take
peece meale from the barke all the woode and sappe, saue onely that
little part of woode and sappe which feedeth the leafe, which in any
wise must be left behind, so that the graft will carry this figure.
{Illustration}
Then goe to the body, arme, or branch of that tree which you intend to
graft, which is to be presupposed must euer haue a smooth and tender
barke, and with a very sharpe knife slit the barke, two slits at least,
two inches long a peece, and about halfe an inch or more distance
betweene the two slits: then make another slit crosse-wise ouerthwart,
from long slit to long slit, the figure whereof will be thus:
{Illustration}
Then with your knife raise the barke gently from the tree, without
breaking, cracking, or brusing: then take your graft, and putting it
vnder the barke lay it flat vnto the sappe of the tree, so as that
little sappe which is left in the leafe, may without impediment cleaue
to the sappe of the tree, then lay downe the barke close againe and
couer the graft, and with a little vntwound hempe, or a soft wollen
list, binde downe the barke close to the graft, and then couer all the
incisions you haue made with greene waxe: by this manner of grafting you
may haue vpon one tree sundry fruits, as from one Apple-tree, both
Pippins, Peare-maines, Russettings and such like, nay, you may haue vpon
one tree, ripe fruit all summer long, as Ienettings from one branch,
Cislings from another, Wibourns from another, Costards and Queene-Apples
from others, and Pippens and Russettings, from others, which bringeth
both delight to the eye, and admiration to the sence, and yet I would
not haue you imagine that this kinde of grafting doth onely worke this
effect, for as before I shewed you, if you graft in the cleft (which is
the fastest way of all grafting) sundry fruits vpon sundry armes or
bowes, you shall likewise haue proceeding from them sundry sorts of
fruits, as either Apples, Plumbes, Peares or any other kind, according
to your composition and industry; as at this day we may dayly see in
many great mens Orchards.
{SN: Grafting on the toppes of trees.}
There is yet another manner of grafting, and it is of all other
especially vsed much in Italy, and yet not any thing disagreeable with
our climate, and that is to graft on the small cyons which are on the
toppes of fruit trees, surely an experience that carryeth in it both
dificulty and wonder, yet being put to approbation is no lesse certaine
then any of the other, the manner whereof is thus: you shall first after
you haue chosen such and so many grafts as you doe intend to graft, and
trimd them in the same manner as you haue beene taught formerly for
grafting within the cleft, you shall then mount vp into the toppe of the
tree, vpon which you meane to graft, and there make choise of the
highest and most principallest cyons (being cleane barkt and round)
that you can perceiue to grow from the tree, then laying the graft, and
the cyon vpon which you are to graft, together, see that they be both of
one bignesse and roundnesse: then with your grafting knife cut the cyon
off betweene the olde woode and the new, and cleaue it downe an inch and
an halfe, or two inches at the most: then put in your graft (which graft
must not be cut thinner on one side, then on the other, but all of one
thicknesse) and when it is in, see that the barke of the graft both
aboue and below, that is, vpon both sides, doe ioyne close, euen, and
firme with the barke of the branch or cyon, and then by foulding a
little soft towe about it, keepe them close together, whilst with clay,
mosse, and the in-most barke of Osyars you lappe them about to defend
them from ayre, winde, and tempests. And herein you shall obserue to
make your graft as short as may be, for the shortest are best, as the
graft which hath not aboue two or three knots, or buddes, and no more.
You may, if you please, with this manner of grafting graft vpon euery
seuerall cyon, a seuerall fruit, and so haue from one tree many fruits,
as in case of grafting with the leafe, and that with much more speede,
by as much as a well-growne graft is more forward and able then a weake
tender leafe. And in these seuerall wayes already declared, consisteth
the whole Art and substance of Grafting: from whence albeit many curious
braines may, from preuaricating trickes, beget showes of other fashions,
yet when true iudgement shall looke vpon their workes, he shall euer
finde some one of these experiments the ground and substance of all
their labours, without which they are able to doe nothing that shall
turne to an assured commoditie.
{SN: The effects of Grafting.}
Now when you haue made your selfe perfect in the sowing, setting,
planting and grafting of trees, you shall then learne to know the
effects, wonders, and strange issues which doe proceede from many quaint
motions and helpes in grafting, as thus: if you will haue Peaches,
Cherryes, Apples, Quinces, Medlars, Damsons, or any Plumbe whatsoeuer,
to ripen earely, as at the least two months before the ordinary time,
and to continue at least a month longer then the accustomed course, you
shall then graft them vpon a Mulberry stocke: and if you will haue the
fruit to tast like spice, with a certaine delicate perfume, you shall
boyle Honey, the powder of Cloues and Soaxe together, and being cold
annoynt the grafts there-with before you put them into the cleft, if you
graft Apples, Peares, or any fruit vpon a Figge-tree stocke, they will
beare fruit without blooming: if you take an Apple graft, & a Peare
graft, of like bignesse, and hauing clouen them, ioyne them as one body
in grafting, the fruit they bring forth will be halfe Apple and halfe
Peare, and so likewise of all other fruits which are of contrary tastes
and natures: if you graft any fruit-tree, or other tree, vpon the Holly
or vpon the Cypresse, they will be greene, and keepe their leaues the
whole yeere, albeit the winter be neuer so bitter.
If you graft either Peach, Plumbe, or any stone-fruit vpon a Willow
stocke, the fruit which commeth of them will be without stones.
If you will change the colour of any fruit, you shall boare a hole
slope-wise with a large auger into the body of the tree, euen vnto the
pith, and then if you will haue the fruit yealow you shal fill the hole
with Saferne dissolued in water: if you will haue it redde, then with
Saunders, and of any other colour you please, and then stoppe the hole
vp close, and couer it with red or yealow waxe: also if you mixe the
coulour with any spice or perfume, the fruit will take a rellish or tast
of the same: many other such like conceits and experiments are practised
amongst men of this Art, but sith they more concerne the curious, then
the wise, I am not so carefull to bestow my labour in giuing more
substantiall satisfaction, knowing curiosity loues that best which
proceedes from their most paine, and am content to referre their
knowledge to the searching of those bookes which haue onely strangnesse
for their subiect, resolued that this I haue written is fully sufficient
for the plaine English husbandman.
CHAP. VI.
_Of the replanting of Trees, and furnishing the Orchard._
As soone as your seedes, or sets, haue brought forth plants, those
plants, through time, made able, and haue receiued grafts, and those
grafts haue couered the heads of the stockes and put forth goodly
branches, you shall then take them vp, and replant them, (because the
sooner it is done the better it is done) in those seuerall places of
your Orchard which before is appointed, and is intended to be prepared,
both by dungging, digging, and euery orderly labour, to receiue euery
seuerall fruit. And herein you shall vnderstand, that as the best times
for grafting are euery month (except October and Nouember) and at the
change of the moone, so the best times for replanting, are Nouember and
March onely, vnlesse the ground be cold and moist and then Ianuary, or
February must be the soonest all wayes, excepted that you doe not
replant in the time of frost, for that is most vnholsome.
{SN: The taking vp of trees.}
Now when you will take vp your trees which you intend to replant in your
Orchard, you shall first with a spade bare all the maine branches of the
roote, and so by degrees digge and loosen the earth from the roote, in
such sort that you may with your owne strength raise the young tree from
the ground, which done, you shall not, according to the fashion of
Fraunce, dismember, or disroabe the tree of his beauties, that is to
say, to cut off all his vpper branches and armes, but you shall
diligently preserue them: for I haue seene a tree thus replanted after
the fall of the leafe to bring forth fruit in the summer following: but
if the tree you replant be olde then it is good to cut off the maine
branches with in a foote of the stocke, least the sappe running vpward,
and so forsaking the roote too sodainely doe kill the whole tree.
When you haue taken your tree vp, you shall obserue how, and in what
manner, it stoode, that is, which side was vpon the South and receiued
most comfort from the sunne, and which side was from it and receiued
most shadow and bleaknesse, and in the same sort as it then stoode, so
shall you replant it againe: this done you shall with a sharpe
cutting-knife, cut off all the maine rootes, within halfe a foote of the
tree, onely the small thriddes or twist-rootes you shall not cut at all:
then bringing the plant into your Orchard, you shall make a round hole
in that place where you intend to set your tree (the rankes, manner,
distance and forme whereof hath beene all ready declared, in the first
Chapter:) and this hole shalbe at least foure foote ouerthwart euery
way, and at least two foote deepe, then shall you fill vp the hole
againe, fifteene inches deepe, with the finest blacke mould, tempered
with Oxe dunge that you can get, so that then the hole shalbe but nine
inches deepe, then you shall take your tree and place it vpon that
earth, hauing care to open euery seuerall branch and thrid of the roote,
& so to place them that they may all looke downe into the earth, and not
any of them to looke backe and turne vpward: then shall you take of the
earth from whence your tree was taken, and tempering it with a fourth
part of Oxe dunge and slekt sope-asshes (for the killing of wormes)
couer all the roote of your tree firmely and strongly: then with greene
soddes, cut and ioyned arteficially together, so sodde the place that
the hole may hardly be discerned. Lastly take a strong stake, and
driuing it hard into the ground neare vnto the new planted tree, with
either a soft hay rope, the broad barke of Willow, or some such like
vnfretting band, tye the tree to the stake, and it will defend it from
the rage of winde and tempests, which should they but shake or trouble
the roote, being new planted, it were inough to confound and spoyle the
tree for euer.
Now, although I haue vnder the title and demonstration of replanting
one tree giuen you a generall instruction for the replanting of all
trees whatsoeuer, yet, for as much as some are not of that strength and
hardnesse to indure so much as some others will, therefore you shal take
these considerations by the way, to fortefie your knowledge with.
First, you shall vnderstand that all your dainty and tender grafted
Plumbes, and fruits, as Abricots, Peaches, Damaske-Plumbes, Verdochyos,
Pescods, Emperialls, and diuers such like, together with Orrenges,
Cytrons, Almonds, Oliues, and others, which indeede are not familiar
with our soyles, as being nearer neighbours to the sunne, doe delight in
a warme, fat, earth, being somewhat sandy, or such a clay whose
coldnesse by Manure is corrected, and therefore here with vs in the
replanting of them you cannot bestow too much cost vpon the mould: as
for the Damson, and all our naturall english Plumbes, they loue a fat,
cold, earth, so that in the replanting of them if you shall lay too much
dunge vnto their roote, you shall through the aboundant heate, doe great
hurt vnto the tree. The cherry delighteth in any clay, so that vpon such
soyle you may vse lesse Manure, but vpon the contrary you cannot lay too
much. The Medlar esteemeth all earths alike, and therefore whether it be
Manured or no it skilles not, sunne and shadow, wet and drinesse, being
all of one force or efficacy. The Peare and Apple-tree delights in a
strong mixt soyle, and therfore indureth Manure kindly, so doth also the
Quince and Warden: lastly the Filbert, the Hasell, and the Chesnut, loue
cold, leane, moist, and sandy earths, in so much that there is no
greater enimy vnto them then a rich soyle: so that in replanting of them
you must euer seeke rather to correct then increase fertillity.
You shall also vnderstand that all such fruit-trees as you doe plant
against the walles of your Orchard (of which I haue spoken already &
deciphered out their places) you shall not suffer to grow as of
themselues, round, and from the wall, but at the times of pruning and
dressing of them (which is euer at the beginning of the spring and
immediately after the fall) you shall as it were plash them, and spread
them against the wall, foulding the armes in loopes of leather, and
nayling them vnto the wall: and to that end you shall place them of such
a fit distance one from another, that they may at pleasure spread and
mount, without interruption: the profit whereof is at this day seene
almost in euery great mans Orchard: and although I haue but onely
appointed vnto the wall the most quaint fruits of forraine nations; yet
there is no fruit of our owne, but if it be so ordered it will prosper
and bring forth his fruit better and in greater abundance. And thus much
for the replanting of trees and furnishing of a well proportioned
Orchard.
CHAP. VII.
_Of the Dressing, Dungging, Proyning, and Preseruing of Trees._
Sith after all the labour spent of ingendring by seede, of fortefying
and inabling by planting, and of multiplying by grafting it is to little
or no purpose if the trees be not maintained and preserued by dressing,
dungging and proyning, I will therefore in this place shew you what
belongs to that office or duty, and first, for the dressing of trees:
you shall vnderstand that it containeth all whatsoeuer is meete for the
good estate of the tree, as first, after your tree is planted, or
replanted, if the season shall fall out hot, dry, and parching, insomuch
that the moisture of the earth is sucked out by the atraction of the
Sunne, and so the tree wanteth the nutriment of moisture, in this case
you shall not omit euery morning before the rising of the sunne, and
euery euening after the set of the sunne, with a great watring-pot
filled with water, to water & bath the rootes of the trees, if they be
young trees, and newly planted, or replanted, but not otherwise: for if
the trees be olde, and of long growth, then you shall saue that labour,
and onely to such olde trees you shall about the midst of Nouember, with
a spade, digge away the earth from the vpper part of the rootes and lay
them bare vntill it be midde-March, and then mingling such earth as is
most agreeable with the fruit and Oxe-dunge and sope-ashes together, so
couer them againe, and tread the earth close about them: as for the
vncouering of your trees in summer I doe not hold it good, because the
reflection of the sunne is somewhat too violent and dryeth the roote,
from whence at that time the sappe naturally is gone: you shall also
euery spring and fall of the leafe clense your fruit trees from mosse,
which proceeding from a cold and cankerous moisture, breedeth dislike,
and barrainenesse in trees: this mosse you must take off with the backe
of an olde knife and leaue the barke smooth, plaine, and vnraced: also
if you shall dunge such trees with the dunge of Swine, it is a ready way
to destroy the mosse.
{SN: Proyning of Trees.}
After you haue drest and trimmed your trees, you shall then proyne them,
which is to cut away all those superfluous branches, armes, or cyons,
which being either barraine, bruised or misplaced, doe like drones,
steale-away that nutriment which should maintaine the better deseruing
sinewes, and you shall vnderstand that the best time for proyning of
trees, is in March and Aprill, at which time the sappe assending vpward,
causeth the trees to budde: the branches you shall cut away are all such
as shall grow out of the stocke vnderneath the place grafted, or all
such as by the shaking of tempests shall grow in a disorderly and ill
fashioned crookednesse, or any other, that out of a well tempered
iudgement shall seeme superfluous and burdensome to the stocke from
whence it springs, also such as haue by disorder beene brooken, or
maimed, and all these you shall cut away with a hooke knife, close by
the tree, vnlesse you haue occasion by some misfortune to cut away some
of the maine and great armes of the tree, and then you shall not vse
your knife for feare of tearing the barke, but taking your sawe you
shall sawe off those great armes close by the tree, neither shall you
sawe them off downeward but vpward, least the waight of the arme breake
the barke from the body: And herein you shall also vnderstand that for
as much as the mischances which beget these dismembrings doe happen at
the latter end of Summer, in the gathering of the fruit, and that it is
not fit such maymed and broken boughes hang vpon the tree till the
Spring, therefore you shall cut them off in the Winter time, but not
close to the tree by almost a foote, and so letting them rest vntill the
spring, at that time cut them off close by the tree. Now if you finde
the superfluitie of branches which annoy your trees to be onely small
cyons, springing from the rootes of the trees, as it often hapneth with
all sorts of Plumbe-trees, Cherry-trees, Nut-trees, and such like, then
you shall in the winter, bare the rootes of those trees, and cut off
those cyons close by the roote: but if your trees be broused or eaten by
tame-Deare, Goates, Sheepe, Kine, Oxen, or such like, then there is no
help for such a misfortune but onely to cut off the whole head and graft
the stocke anew.
{SN: Of Barke-bound.}
Next to the proyning of trees, is the preseruing, phisicking, and curing
of the diseases of trees: to which they are subiect as well as our
naturall bodyes: and first of all, there is a disease called
Barke-bound, which is when the barke, through a mislike and leperous
drynesse, bindeth in the tree with such straitnesse that the sappe being
denied passage the body growes into a consumption: it is in nature like
vnto that disease which in beasts is called hide-bound, and the cure is
thus: at the beginning of March take a sharpe knife, and from the toppe
of the body of the tree, to the very roote, draw downe certaine slits,
or incissions, cleane through the barke, vnto the very sappe of the
tree, round about the tree, & then with the backe of your knife open
those slits and annoint them all through with Tarre, and in short space
it will giue libertie vnto the tree to encrease & grow: this disease
commeth by the rubbing of cattell against the tree, especially Swine,
who are very poyson vnto all plants.
{SN: Of the Gall.}
There is another disease in fruit-trees, called the Gall, and it eateth
and consumeth the barke quit away, and so in time kills the tree: the
cure is to cut and open the barke which you see infected, and with a
chissell to take away all that is foule and putrefied, and then to
clappe Oxe dunge vpon the place, and it will helpe it, and this must be
done euer in winter.
{SN: Of the Canker.}
The Canker in fruit trees is the consumption both of the barke and the
body, & it commeth either by the dropping of trees one vpon another, or
else when some hollow places of the tree retaineth raine water in them,
which fretting through the barke, poysoneth the tree: the cure is to cut
away all such boughes as by dropping breede the euill, and if the hollow
places cannot be smooth and made euen, then to stoppe them with clay,
waxe, and sope-ashes mixt together.
{SN: Of worme-eaten barkes.}
If the barkes of your trees be eaten with wormes, which you shall
perceiue by the swelling of the barke, you shall then open the barke and
lay there-vpon swines dunge, sage, and lime beaten together, and bound
with a cloath fast to the tree, and it will cure it: or wash the tree
with cowes-pisse and vinegar and it will helpe it.
{SN: Of Pismiers and Snailes.}
If your young trees be troubled with Pismiers, or Snailes, which are
very noysome vnto them, you shall take vnsleckt lime and sope-ashes and
mingling them with wine-lees, spread it all about the roote of the trees
so infected, and annoint the body of the tree likewise therewith, and it
will not onely destroy them but giue comfort to the tree: the soote of a
chimney or Oake sawe-dust spread about the roote will doe the same.
{SN: Of Caterpillers, and Earewigges.}
If Caterpillers doe annoy your young trees, who are great deuourers of
the leaues and young buddes, and spoylers of the barke, you shall, if it
be in the summer time, make a very strong brine of water and salt, and
either with a garden pumpe, placed in a tubbe, or with squirts which
haue many hoales you shall euery second day water and wash your trees,
and it will destroy them, because the Caterpiller naturally cannot
indure moisture, but if neuerthelesse you see they doe continue still
vpon your trees in Winter, then you shall when the leaues are falne away
take dankish straw and setting it on fire smeare and burne them from the
tree, and you shall hardly euer be troubled with them againe vpon the
same trees: roules of hay layd on the trees will gather vp Earewigges
and kill them.
{SN: Of the barrainenesse of Trees.}
If your trees be barraine, and albeit they flourish and spread there
leaues brauely, yet bring forth no fruit at all, it is a great
sicknesse, and the worst of all other: therefore you shall vnderstand it
proceedeth of two causes: first, of two much fertillitie, and fatnesse
of the ground, which causeth the leafe to put forth and flourish in such
vnnaturall abundance, that all such sappe and nutriment as should knit
and bring forth fruit, turnes onely vnto leafe, cyons, and vnprofitable
branches, which you shall perceiue both by the abundance of the leaues
and by the colour also, which will be of a more blacker and deeper
greene, and of much larger proportion then those which haue but their
naturall and proper rights: and the cure thereof is to take away the
earth from the roote of such trees and fill vp the place againe with
other earth, which is of a much leaner substance: but if your tree haue
no such infirmitie of fatnesse, but beareth his leaues and branches in
good order and of right colour and yet notwithstanding is barraine and
bringeth forth little or no fruit, then that disease springeth from some
naturall defect in the tree, and the cure thereof is thus: first, you
shall vnbare the roote of the tree, and then noting which is the
greatest and principallest branch of all the roote, you shall with a
great wimble boare a hole into that roote and then driue a pinne of olde
dry Ashe into the same (for Oake is not altogether so good) and then
cutting the pinne off close by the roote, couer all the head of the
pinne with yealow waxe, and then lay the mould vpon the roote of the
tree againe, and treade it hard and firmely downe, and there is no
doubte but the tree will beare the yeere following: in Fraunce they vse
for this infirmitie to boare a hoale in the body of the tree
slope-wise, somewhat past the hart, and to fill vp the hoale with life
honey and Rose-water mixt together, and incorporated for at least
xxiiij. howers, and then to stoppe the hole with a pinne of the one
woode: also if you wash the rootes of your trees in the drane water
which runneth from your Barley when you steepe it for Malt, it will cure
this disease of barrainenesse.
{SN: Of the bitternesse of Fruit.}
If the fruit which is vpon your trees be of a bitter and sootie tast, to
make it more pleasant and sweet you shall wash your tree all ouer with
Swines dunge and water mixt together, & to the rootes of the trees you
shall lay earth and Swines dunge mixt together, which must be done in
the month of Ianuary and February onely, and it will make the fruit tast
pleasantly. And thus much for the dressing and preseruing of trees.
CHAP. VIII.
_Of the Vine, and of his ordering._
For as much as the nature, temperature, and clymate, of our soyle is not
so truely proper and agreeing with the Vine as that of Fraunce, Italy,
Spaine, and such like, and sith wee haue it more for delight, pleasure,
and prospect, then for any peculyar profit, I will not vndertake
_Monsiuer Lybaults_ painefull labour, in discribing euery curious
perfection or defect that belongs thereunto, as if it were the onely
iewell and commoditie of our kingdome, but onely write so much as is
fitting for our knowledge touching the maintaynance, increase, and
preseruation thereof, in our Orchards, Gardens, and other places of
recreation.
{SN: Of planting or setting the Vine.}
First then to speake of the planting or setting of the Vine, your
greatest diligence must be to seeke out the best plants, and if that
which is most strange, rare, great and pleasant be the best, then is
that grape which is called the Muskadine, or Sacke grape, the best, and
haue their beginning either from Spaine, the Canary Ilands, or such like
places: next to them is the French grape, of which there be many kindes,
the best whereof is the grape of Orleance, the next the grape of
Gascoynie, the next of Burdeaux, and the worst of Rochell, and not any
of these but by industry will prosper in our English gardens: when
therefore you chuse your plants, you shall chuse such of the young cyons
as springing from the olde woode, you may in the cutting cut at least a
ioynt or two of olde woode with the young: for the olde will take
soonest, and this olde woode must be at least seauen or eight inches
long, and the young cyon almost a yard, and the thicker and closer the
ioynts of the young cyon are, so much the better they are: and the fit
time for cutting and gathering these sets are in midde-Ianuary, then
hauing prepared, digged, and dunged your earth the winter before, you
shall at the latter end of Ianuary take two of these sets, or plants,
placing them according to this figure:
{Illustration}
And lay them in the earth slope-wise, at least a foote deepe, leauing
out of the earth, vncouered, not aboue foure or fiue ioynts, at the
most, and then couer them with good earth firmely, closely, and
strongly, hauing regard to raise those cyons which are without the earth
directly vpward, obseruing after they be set, once in a month to weede
them, and keepe them as cleane as is possible: for nothing is more
noysome vnto them then the suffocating of weeds: also you shall not
suffer the mould to grow hard or bind about the rootes, but with a small
spade once in a fortnight to loosen and breake the earth, because there
rootes are so tender that the least straytning doth strangle and
confound them. If the season doe grow dry, you may vse to water them,
but not in such sort as you water other plants, which is to sprinckle
water round about the earth of the rootes, but you shall with a round
Iron made for the purpose somewhat bigger then a mans fingar, make
certaine holes into the earth, close vpon the roote of the Vine, and
powre therein either water, the dregges of strong-Ale, or the lees of
Wine, or if you will you may mixe with the lees of Wine either
Goats-milke, or Cowes-milke, and power it into the holes and it will
nourish the Vine exceedingly, and not the Vine onely, but all sorts of
dainty grafted Plumbes, especially Peaches.
{SN: Of proyning the Vine.}
Now for proyning the Vine, you shall vnderstand that it is euer to be
done after the fall of the leafe, when the sappe is desended downeward,
for if you shall proyne, or cut him, either in the spring, or when the
sappe is aloft, it will bleede so exceedingly, that with great
difficulty you shall saue the body of the tree from dying: and, in
proyning of the Vine you shall obserue two things, the first, that you
cut away all superfluous cyons and branches, both aboue and below, which
either grow disorderly aboue, or fruitlessely below, and in cutting them
you shall obserue, neither to cut the olde woode with the young cyon,
nor to leaue aboue one head or leader vpon one branch: secondly, you
shall in proyning, plash and spread the VINE thinnely against the wall,
giuing euery seuerall branch and cyon his place, and passage, and not
suffer it to grow loosely, rudely, or like a wilde thorne, out of all
decency and proportion: for you must vnderstand that your Grapes doe
grow euer vpon the youngest cyons, and if of them you shall preserue too
many, questionlesse for want of nourishment they will lose their vertue,
and you your profit. Now if your Vine be a very olde Vine, and that his
fruit doth decay, either in quantitie or proportion; if then you finde
he haue any young cyons which spring from his roote, then when you
proyne him you shall cut away all the olde stocke, within lesse then an
handfull of the young cyons, and make them the leaders, who will prosper
and continue in perfection a long time after, especially if you trimme
the rootes with fresh earth, and fresh dunge. Againe, if you be carefull
to looke vnto your Vine, you shall perceiue close by euery bunch of
grapes certaine small thridde-like cyons, which resemble twound wyars,
curling and turning in many rings, these also take from the grapes very
much nutriment, so that it shall be a labour very well imployd to cut
them away as you perceiue them.
{SN: Experiments of the Vine.}
Now from the Vine there is gathered sundry experiments, as to haue it
tast more pleasant then the true nature of the grape, and to smell in
the mouth odoriferously, or as if it were perfumed, which may be done in
this sort: Take damaske-Rose-water and boyle therein the powder of
Cloaues, Cynamon, three graines of Amber, and one of Muske, and when it
is come to be somewhat thicke, take a round goudge and make a hole in
the maine stocke of the Vine, full as deepe as the hart thereof, and
then put therein this medicine, then stopping the hole with Cypresse, or
Iuniper, lay greene-waxe thereupon, and binde a linnen cloath about it,
and the next grapes which shall spring from that Vine will tast as if
they were preserued or perfumed.
If you will haue grapes without stones, you shall take your plants and
plant the small ends downeward and be assured your desire is attained.
The Vine naturally of himselfe doth not bring forth fruit till it haue
beene three yeeres planted: but if euening and morning for the first
month you will bath his roote with Goats-milke or Cowes-milke, it will
beare fruit the first yeere of his planting. Lastly, you may if you
please graft one Vine vpon another, as the sweet vpon the sower, as the
Muskadine grape, or greeke, vpon the Rochell or Burdeaux, the Spanish,
or Iland grape, on the Gascoyne, and the Orleance vpon any at all: and
these compositions are the best, and bring forth both the greatest and
pleasantest grapes: therefore whensoeuer you will graft one grape vpon
another, you shall doe it in the beginning of Ianuary, in this sort:
first, after you haue chosen and trimmed your grafts, which in all sorts
must be like the grafts of other fruits, then with a sharpe knife, you
shall cleaue the head of the Vine, as you doe other stockes and then put
in your graft, or cyon, being made as thinne as may be and see that the
barkes and sappes ioyne euen and close together, then clay it, mosse it,
and couer it, as hath beene before declared.
{SN: The medicining of the Vine.}
If your Vine grow too ranke and thicke of leaues, so that the sappe doth
wast it selfe in them, and you thereby lose the profit of the fruit, you
shall then bare all the rootes of the Vine, and cast away the earth,
filling vp the place againe with sand & ashes mingled together: but if
the Vine be naturally of it selfe barraine, then with a goudge you shall
make a hole halfe way through the maine body of the Vine, and driue into
the hole a round pible stone, which although it goe straitly in, yet it
may not fill vp the hole, but that the sicke humour of the Vine may
passe thorrow thereat: then couer the roote with rich earth, and Oxe
dunge mixt together, and once a day for a month water it with olde
pisse, or vrine of a man, and it will make the tree fruitfull: if the
Vine be troubled with Wormes, Snailes, Ants, Earewigges, or such like,
you shall morning and euening sprinckle it ouer with cowes-pisse and
vinegar mixt together & it will helpe it: & thus much for ordering the
Vine.
CHAP. IX.
_The office of the Fruiterrer, or the Gatherer, and keeper, of Fruit._
After you haue planted euery seuerall quarter, allye, and border within
your Orchard, with euery seuerall fruit proper vnto his place, and that
you haue placed them in that orderly and comely equipage which may giue
most delight to the eye, profit to the tree, and commendations to the
workeman, (according to the forme and order prescribed in the first
Chapter) and that now the blessing of the highest, time, and your
indeuours hath brought forth the haruest and recompence of your trauell,
so that you behould the long-expected fruit hang vpon the trees, as it
were in their ripenesse, wooing you to plucke, tast, and to deliuer them
from the wombes of their parents, it is necessary then that you learne
the true office of the Fruiterer, who is in due season and time to
gather those fruits which God hath sent him: for as in the husbanding of
our grayne if the Husbandman be neuer so carefull, or skilfull, in
ploughing, dungging, sowing, weeding and preseruing his crop, yet in the
time of haruest be negligent, neither regarding the strength or ripnesse
thereof, or in the leading and mowing respects not whether it be wet or
dry, doth in that moments space loose the wages of his whole yeeres
trauell, getting but durt from durt, and losse from his negligence: so
in like case houlds it with all other fruits, if a man with neuer so
great care and cost procure, yet if he be inrespectiue in the gathering,
all his former businesse is vaine and to no purpose; and therefore I
hould nothing more necessary then the relation of this office of the
Fruiterer, which is the consummation and onely hope of our cost, and
diligence, teaching vs to gather wisely what wee haue planted wearily,
and to eate with contentment what we haue preserued with care.
{SN: Of gathering and preseruing Cherries.}
Know then, that of all fruits (for the most part) the Cherry is the
soonest ripe, as being one of the oldest children of the summer, and
therefore first of all to be spoken of in this place, yet are not all
Cherries ripe at one instant, but some sooner then other some, according
to the benefit of the Sunne, the warmth of the ayre, and the strength of
sappe in the branch on which the Cherry hangeth: they are a fruit tender
and pleasant, and therefore much subiect to be deuoured and consumed
with Byrds of the smallest kindes, as Sparrowes, Robins, Starlings, and
such like, especially the Iay, and the Bull-finch, who deuoure them
stones and all, euen so fast as they rypen: for preuention whereof; if
you haue great abundance of Cherry trees, as maine holts that be either
one or many akers in compasse, you shall then in diuers places of your
holts, as well in the midst, as out-corners, cause to be errected vp
certaine long poales of Fyrre, or other woode, which may mount somewhat
aboue the toppes of the trees, and one the toppes of those poales you
shall place certaine clappe-milles made of broken trenchers ioyned
together like sayles, which being moued and carryed about with the
smallest ayre, may haue vnderneath the sayles a certaine loose little
board, against which euery sayle may clap and make a great noyse, which
will afright and scare the Byrds from your trees: these milles you shall
commonly see in Husbandmens yards placed on their stackes or houells of
Corne, which doth preserue them from fowle and vermine: but for want of
these clap-milles you must haue some boy or young fellow that must euery
morning from the dawning of the day till the Sunne be more then an houre
high, and euery euening from fiue of the clocke till nine, runne vp and
downe your ground, whooping, showtying, and making of a great noyse, or
now and then shooting of some Harquebush, or other Peece: but by no
meanes to vse slings or throwing of stones, least by the miscarriage of
his hand hee either beate downe the fruit or bruise the trees. In this
sort hauing preserued your Cherries from destruction, you shall then
know there ripenesse by their colours, for euer those which are most
red, are most ripe, and when you see any that are ripe, you shall take a
light ladder, made either of fyrre or sallow, and setting it carefully
against the branches, so as you neither bruise them nor the fruit, you
shall gather those you finde ripe, not taking the fruit from the stalke,
but nipping the stalke and fruit both together from the tree: also you
shall be carefull in gathering to handle or touch the Cherry so little
as may be, but the stalke onely, especially if your hands be hot, or
sweaty, for that will change the colour of your Cherries, and make them
looke blacke: if there be any ripe Cherries which hang out of the reach
of your hands, then you shall haue a fine small gathering hooke of
woode, whose bout shall be made round, and smooth, for nipping the barke
of the branches, and with it you shall gently pull vnto you those
branches you cannot reach: you shall also haue a little round basket of
almost a foote deepe, made with a siue bottome, hauing a handle thwarte
the toppe, to which a small hooke being fastned, you shall with that
hooke hang the basket by you on some conuenient cyon, and as you gather
the Cherries, gently lay them downe into the same, and when you haue
filled your basket you shall descend and empty it into larger great
baskets made of the same fashion, with siue bottomes, and hauing
vnderneath two broad lathes or splinters, at least three fingers broad a
peece, within foure inches one of the other, and going both one way
crosse ouerthwart the basket, that if either man or woman shall carry
them vpon their heads, which is the best manner of cariage, then the
splinters may defend the bottome of the basket from the head of the
party, and keepe the Cherries from hurt or bruising, and if you haue
occasion to carry your Cherries farre, and that the quantitie grow
beyond the support of a man, then you shall packe them in hampers or
panniers made with false bottoms like siues, and finely lyned on the
out side with white straw, and so being closely trust on each side a
Horses-backe, to carry them whether you please. You shall by no meanes
suffer your Cherries to lye in any great or thicke heapes one vpon
another, but vntill you sell them, or vse them, lay them as thinne as
may be, because they are apt of themselues to sweat and catch heate, and
that heate doth soone depriue them of the glory of their colour. When
you gather any Cherries to preserue, you shall gather those which are
the greatest, the ripest, you shall pull them from their stalkes one by
one, and vse them at furthest within xxiiij. howers after the time they
are gotten.
{SN: The gathering of stone Fruit.}
{SN: Of gathering hard Plumbes.}
{SN: Of keeping of Plumbes.}
For the gathering of Plumbes in generall, it is in the same manner as
you did gather your Cherries, both with such a like ladder, such a like
hooke, and such like vessels, onely some more speciall obseruations are
to be obserued in gathering your dainty grafted Plumbes, then of the
others, which are of a more hard and induring nature. You shall know
then that for gathering of Abricots, Peaches, Date-Plumbes, and such
like grafted Plumbes, you shall duely consider when they are perfectly
ripe, which you shall not iudge by their dropping from the tree, which
is a signe of ouer-much ripnesse, tending to rottennesse, but by the
true mixture of their colour, and perfect change from their first
complexion: for when you shall perceiue that there is no greenenesse nor
hardnesse in their out-sides, no, not so much as at the setting on of
the stalke, you may then iudge that they are ready to be gathered, and
for a perfecter tryall thereof you may if you please, take one which you
thinke ripest from the tree, and opening it if you see the stone comes
cleane and dry away and not any of the in-part of the fruit cleauing
vnto it, then you may assure your selfe that the fruit is ready to be
gathered, which you shall with great deligence and care gather, not by
any meanes laying one Plumbe vpon another, but each seuerally by
another, for these dainty Plumbes are naturally so tender that the least
touch, though of themselues, doth bruise them, and occasion
rottennesse. Now when you haue gathered them, if either you haue desire
to send them any iourney, as in gratulation to your friends, or for
other priuate commoditie, you shall take some close, smooth, boxe,
answerable to the store of fruit you are to send, and first line it
within all ouer with white paper, then lay your Plumbes one by one all
ouer the bottome of the boxe, then couering them all ouer with white
paper, lay as many moe vpon the toppe of them, and couer them likewise
with paper, as before, and so lay row vpon row with papers betweene
them, vntill the boxe be sufficiently filled, and then closing it vp
sende it whether you please, and they will take the least hurt, whereas
if you should line the boxe either with hay or straw, the very skinnes
are so tender that the straw would print into them and bruise them
exceedingly, and to lay any other soft thing about them, as either wooll
or bumbast, is exceeding euill, because it heateth the Plumbes, and
maketh them sweat, through which they both loose their colour and rot
speedily. As touching the gathering of Plumbes when they are hard, and
to ripen them afterward by laying them vpon nettles, to which consenteth
the most of our London-Fruiterrers, I am vtterly against the opinion,
because I both know Nature to be the perfectest worke-Mistris, and where
she is abridged of her power there euer to follow disorders and
imperfections, as also that when such things are done, as it were
through an ouer-hasty constraint, there cannot proceede any thing but
abortiuenesse, and a distastfull rellish: from whence I thinke it comes
to passe that in London a man shall very seldome tast a delicate or well
rellisht Plumbe, vnlesse it be from such as hauing fruit of their owne,
make no commoditie thereof more then their owne pleasures: yet thus much
I would perswade euery one, that if they haue moe Plumbes ripe at once
then they can vse, or spend, that then after they are gathered, to
spread them thinnely vpon Nettles or Vine-tree leaues, and it will
preserue them sound and well coloured a long time together, but if your
store be so superabundant that in no reasonable time you can spend
them, then what you doe not preserue, or make Godiniake, or Maruulade
of, the rest you shall take and sprinkling them ouer with sweet-worte,
or growt, and then laying them one by one (yet so as they may not touch
one another) vpon hurdles or fleakes made of wands, or twigges, and put
them into an Ouen after bread or Pyes haue beene taine thereout, and so
leasurely dry them, and they will not onely last, but tast pleasantly
all the yeere after: and in this sort you may vse all kindes of Plumbes,
or Peares, whatsoeuer. Now for the gathering of the other ordinary sorts
of vngrafted Plumbes, which haue both much stronger rindes, and are
lesse subiect to rotting, you shall gather them, carry, or transport
them, in the same manner that you did your Cherries, onely in these, as
in all other sorts of fruit whatsoeuer, you shall not omit neuer to
gather, or pull them from the tree, till the dewe be dryed cleane both
from the grasse and from the trees, and that the day be dry, faire, and
full of sunne-shine: for the least wet or moisture doth canker and rot
the fruit.
{SN: Of the gathering of Peares.}
As touching the gathering of Peares, though sundry Fruiterrers obserue
sundry wayes in gathering them, as some making more hast then
good-speed, as either to haue the first tast, or the first profit, some
vsing more negligence, thincking their store so great it will neuer be
consumed, and some so curious that they will not gather till the Peares
fall into their bosomes, all which are dispraiseable fashions, yet I for
my part would euer aduise all diligent husbands to obserue a
mediocritie, and take the fittest season for the gathering of his fruit:
as thus for example. If because you are vnexperienced or vnacquainted
with the fruit you doe not know the due time of his ripening, you shall
obserue the colour of the Peare, and if you see it doe alter, either in
part, or in all, you shall be assured the fruit is neare ripening, for
Peares doe neuer change their colours, but when they doe desire to be
taken from the tree: and of all fruit the Peare may be gathered the
hardest, because both his owne naturall heate and peculiar quallittie
will ripen him best with lying: yet to be more strongly fortefied in the
knowledge of the ripenesse of your fruit, and because it is better to
get a day too late, then an hower to earely, you shall before you gather
your Peares, whether they be Summer fruit or Winter fruit, or whether
you meane to spend them soone or preserue them long, take one of them
from the tree, which is neither the ripest nor the greenest, but betwixt
both, and cut it through the midst with your knife, not longwise, but
ouerthwart, and then looke into the coare where the kirnells lye, and if
it be hollow so as the kirnells lye as it were hollow therein, the
neather ends thereof being turned either blacke, or blackish, albeit the
complexion of the Peare be little, or not at all altered, yet the Peares
haue their full growth, and may very well be gathered: then laying them
either vpon a bedde of ferne, or straw, one vpon another, in great
thicknesse, their owne naturall heate will in short space ripen them,
which you shall perceiue both by the speedy changing of their colour, &
the strength of their smell, which will be exceeding suffocating, which
as soone as you perceiue, you shall then spread them thinner and
thinner, vntill they be all ripe, and then lay them one by one, in such
sort as they may not touch one another, and then they will last much the
longer, you shall also after they be ripe, neither suffer them to haue
straw nor ferne vnder them, but lay them either vpon some smooth table,
boards or fleakes of wands, and they will last the longer.
{SN: Of transporting, or carrying of Peares farre.}
If you be to carry or transport Peares farre, you shall then gather them
so much the sooner, and not suffer any ripe one to be amongst them, and
then lyning great wicker baskets (such as will hould at least quarters a
peece) finely within with white-straw, fill them vp with Peares, and
then couer them with straw, and corde them aboue, and you may either
transport them by land or Sea, whether you please, for they will ripen
in their cariage: but when you come to your place of residence, then you
must needs vnpacke them and spread them thinner, or else they will rot
and consume in a sodaine.
{SN: Of gathering diuersly.}
There be sundry wayes of gathering Peares, or other fruit, as namely, to
climbe into the tree and to haue a basket with a line fastned thereto,
and so when it is filled to let it downe, and cause it to be emptied,
which labour though some of our southerne Fruiterers doe not much
commend, yet for mine owne part I doe not see much errour therein, but
that it is both allowable and conuenient, both because it neither
bruiseth the fruit, nor putteth the gatherer to any extraordinary
labour, onely the imaginary euill is, that by climbing vp into the tree,
hee that gathereth the fruit may indanger the breaking, slipping, and
disbranching of many of the young cyons, which breedeth much hurt and
damage to the tree, but iudgement, and care, which ought to be
apropriate to men of this quallitie, is a certaine preuenter of all such
mischeifes. Now for such as in gathering of their fruit doe euery time
that the basket is full bring it downe themselues from the tree, and
empty it by powring the fruit rudely, and boystrously forth, or for
beating of fruit downe with long poales, loggets, or such like, they are
both most vilde and preposterous courses, the first being full of too
much foolish and carelesse trouble, the latter of too much disorder, &
cruelty, ruyning in a moment what hath beene many yeeres in building: as
for the climbing the tree with a ladder, albeit it be a very good way
for the gathering of fruit, yet if it be neuer so little indiscreetly
handled, it as much hazardeth the breaking and bruising both of the
fruit and the small cyons, as either climbing the tree, or any other way
whatsoeuer.
{SN: The gathering of Apples.}
Now for the gathering of your Apples: you shall vnderstand that your
summer fruit, as your Ieniting, Wibourne, and such like, are first to be
gathered, whose ripenesse, you may partly know by the change of colour,
partly by the pecking of Birds, but cheifely by the course formerly
discribed for your knowledge of the ripenesse of the Peare, which is the
hollownesse of coare, and liberty of the kirnell onely, and when you
doe perceiue they are ripe, you shall gather them in such wise as hath
beene declared for the gathering of your Peares, without respecting the
state of the Moone, or any such like obseruation, but when you come to
gather your Winter-fruit, which is the Pippin, Peare-maine, Russetting,
Blacke-annat, and such like, you shall in any wise gather them in the
wane of the Moone, and, as before I said, in the dryest season that may
be, and if it be so that your store be so great that you cannot gather
all in that season, yet you shall get so much of your principall fruit,
the youngest and fairest, as is possible to be gotten, and preserue it
for the last which you intend either to spend, or vtter. Now for the
manner of gathering your Apples I doe not thinke you can amend or
approue a better way then that which hath beene discribed for the
gathering of Peares, yet some of our late practitioners (who thinke
themselues not cunning if they be not curious) dislike that way, and
will onely haue a gathering apron, into which hauing gathered their
fruit, they doe empty it into larger vessells: this gathering apron is a
strong peece of Canuas at least an ell euery way, which hauing the vpper
end made fast about a mans necke, & the neather end with three loopes,
that is, one at each corner, & one in the midst, through which you shall
put a string, and binde it about your waste, in so much that both the
sides of your apron being open you may put your fruit therein with which
hand you please: this manner of gathering Apples is not amisse, yet in
my conceit the apron is so small a defence for the Apples, that if it
doe but knocke against the boughes as you doe moue your selfe, it cannot
chuse but bruise the fruit very much, which ought euer to be auoyded:
therefore still I am of this opinion, there is no better way, safer, nor
more easie, then gathering them into a small basket, with a long line
thereat, as hath beene before declared in the gathering of Peares. Now
you shall carefully obserue in empting one basket into another, that you
doe it so gently as may be, least in powring them out too rudely the
stalkes of the fruit doe pricke one another, which although it doe
appeare little or nothing at the first, yet it is the first ground,
cause, and beginning of rottennesse, and therefore you shall to your
vttermost power gather your Apples with as small stalkes as may be, so
they haue any at all, which they must needes haue, because that as too
bigge stalkes doth pricke and bruise the fruit, so to haue none at all
makes the fruit rot first in the place where the stalke should be: you
shall also keepe your fruit cleane from leaues, for they being greene
and full of moisture, when by reason of their lying close together they
beginne to wither they strike such an heate into the Apples, that they
mil-dew and rot instantly.
{SN: Of Fallings.}
{SN: Of carriage and keeping Fruit.}
As touching your Fallings, which are those Apples which fall from your
trees, either through too much ripenesse, or else through the violence
of winde, or tempests, you shall by no meanes match them, or mixe them,
with your gathered fruit, for they can by no meanes last or indure so
long, for the latter which falleth by force of winde, wanting the true
nourishment of the earth and the kindly ripening vpon the tree, must
necessarily shrinke wither, and grow riuelled, so that your best course
is to spend them presently, with all speede possible: for the other
which hath too much ripenesse from the earth, and the tree, though it be
much better then the other, yet it cannot be long lasting, both because
it is in the falling bruised, and also hath too much ripenesse, which is
the first steppe to rottennesse, so that they must likewise be spent
with all expedition. For the carriage of your Apples, if the place be
not farre whether you should carry them, you shall then in those large
baskets into which you last emptied them, carry them vpon cole-staues,
or stangs, betwixt two men, and hauing brought them carefully into your
Apple-loft, power them downe gently vpon bedds of ferne or straw, and
lay them in reasonable large heapes, euery sort of Apples seuerall by
themselues, without mixture, or any confusion: and for such Apples as
you would haue to ripen soone, you shall couer them all ouer with ferne
also, but for such as you would haue take all possible leasure in
ripening, those you shall lay neither vpon ferne, nor straw, but vpon
the bare boards, nay, if you lay them vpon a plaster floare (which is of
all floares the coldest) till Saint Andrewes tide, it is not amisse, but
very profitable, and the thinner you lay them so much the better. Now if
you haue any farre iourney to carry your Apples, either by land, or by
water, then trimming and lyning the insides of your baskets with ferne,
or wheat-straw wouen as it were cleane through the basket, you shall
packe, couer, and cord vp your Apples, in such sort as you did your
Peares, and there is no danger in the transportation of them, be it by
shippe, cart, waggon, or horse-backe. If you be inforced to packe sundry
sorts of Apples in one basket, see that betwixt euery sort you lay a
diuision of straw, or ferne, that when they are vnpackt, you may lay
them againe seuerally: but if when they are vnpackt, for want of roome
you are compeld to lay some sorts together, in any wise obserue to mixe
those sorts together which are nearest of taste, likest of colour, and
all of one continuance in lasting: as for the packing vp of fruit in
hogsheads, or shooting them vnder hatches when you transport them by
Sea, I like neither of the courses, for the first is too close, and
nothing more then the want of ayre doth rot fruit, the other is subiect
to much wet, when the breach of euery Sea indangereth the washing of the
Apples, and nothing doth more certainely spoyle them. The times most
vnseasonable for the transporting of fruit, is either in the month of
March, or generally in any frosty weather, for if the sharpe coldenesse
of those ayres doe touch the fruit, it presently makes them looke
blacke, and riuelled, so that there is no hope of their continuance.
The place where you shall lay your fruit must neither be too open, nor
too close, yet rather close then open, it must by no meanes be low vpon
the ground, nor in any place of moistnesse: for moisture breedes
fustinesse, and such naughty smells easily enter into the fruit, and
taint the rellish thereof, yet if you haue no other place but some low
cellar to lay your fruit in, then you shall raise shelues round about,
the nearest not within two foote of the ground, and lay your Apples
thereupon, hauing them first lyned, either with sweet Rye-straw,
Wheate-straw, or dry ferne: as these vndermost roomes are not the best,
so are the vppermost, if they be vnseeld, the worst of all other,
because both the sunne, winde, and weather, peircing through the tiles,
doth annoy and hurt the fruit: the best roome then is a well seeld
chamber, whose windowes may be shut and made close at pleasure, euer
obseruing with straw to defend the fruit from any moist stone wall, or
dusty mudde wall, both which are dangerous annoyances.
{SN: The seperating of Fruit.}
Now for the seperating of your fruit, you shall lay those nearest hand,
which are first to be spent, as those which will last but till
Alhallontide, as the Cisling, Wibourne, and such like, by themselues:
those which will last till Christmas, as the Costard, Pome-water,
Queene-Apple, and such like: those which will last till Candlemas, as
the Pome-de-roy, Goose-Apple, and such like, and those which will last
all the yeere, as the Pippin, Duzin, Russetting, Peare-maine, and such
like, euery one in his seuerall place, & in such order that you may
passe from bed to bed to clense or cast forth those which be rotten or
putrefied at your pleasure, which with all diligence you must doe,
because those which are tainted will soone poyson the other, and
therefore it is necessary as soone as you see any of them tainted, not
onely to cull them out, but also to looke vpon all the rest, and deuide
them into three parts, laying the soundest by themselues, those which
are least tainted by themselues, and those which are most tainted by
themselues, and so to vse them all to your best benefit.
Now for the turning of your longest lasting fruit, you shall know that
about the latter end of December is the best time to beginne, if you
haue both got and kept them in such sort as is before sayd, and not mixt
fruit of more earely ripening amongst them: the second time you shall
turne them, shall be about the end of February, and so consequently once
euery month, till Penticost, for as the yeere time increaseth in heate
so fruit growes more apt to rot: after Whitsontide you shall turne them
once euery fortnight, alwayes in your turning making your heapes thinner
and thinner; but if the weather be frosty then stirre not your fruit at
all, neither when the thaw is, for then the fruit being moist may by no
meanes be touched: also in wet weather fruit will be a little dankish,
so that then it must be forborne also, and therefore when any such
moistnesse hapneth, it is good to open your windowes and let the ayre
dry your fruit before it be turned: you may open your windowe any time
of the yeere in open weather, as long as the sunne is vpon the skye, but
not after, except in March onely, at what time the ayre and winde is so
sharpe that it tainteth and riuelleth all sorts of fruits whatsoeuer.
{SN: To keepe Fruit in frost.}
If the frost be very extreame, and you feare the indangering your fruit,
it is good to couer them somewhat thicke with fine hay, or else to lay
them couered all ouer either in Barley-chaffe, or dry Salte: as for the
laying them in chests of Iuniper, or Cipresse, it is but a toy, and not
worth the practise: if you hang Apples in nettes within the ayre of the
fire it will keepe them long, but they will be dry and withered, and
will loose their best rellish.
{SN: Of Wardens.}
Now for the gathering, keeping, ordering, and preseruing of Wardens,
they are in all sorts and in all respects to be vsed as you doe vse your
Peares, onely you are to consider that they are a fruit of a much
stronger constitution, haue a much thicker skinne, and will endure much
harder season: neither ought you to seeke to ripen them in hast, or
before the ordinary time of their owne nature, and therefore to them you
shall vse neither straw, ferne, nor hay, but onely dry boards to lay
them vpon, and no otherwise.
{SN: Of Medlars and Seruices.}
For your Medlars, you shall gather them about the midst of October,
after such time as the frost hath nipt and bitten them, for before they
will not be ready, or loosen from the stalke, and then they will be
nothing ripe, but as hard as stones, for they neuer ripen vpon the tree,
therefore as soone as you haue gathered them, you shall packe them into
some close vessell, and couer them all ouer, and round about, with
thicke woollen cloathes, and about the cloathes good store of hay, and
some other waight of boards, or such like vpon them, all which must
bring them into an extreame heate, without which they will neuer ripen
kindely, because their ripenesse is indeed perfect rottennesse: and
after they haue layne thus, at least a fornight, you shall then looke
vpon them, and turning them ouer, such as you finde ripe you shall take
away, the rest you shall let remaine still, for they will not ripen all
at once, and those which are halfe ripe you shall also remoue into a
third place, least if you should keepe them together, they should
beginne to grow mouldy before the other were ready; and in the selfe
same manner as you vse your Medlars, so you shall vse your Seruices, and
they will ripen most kindely: or if you please to sticke them betwixt
large clouen stickes, and to sprinckle a little olde beare vpon them,
and so set them in a close roome, they will ripen as kindely as any
other way whatsoeuer.
{SN: Of Quinces.}
Now for Quinces, they are a fruit which by no meanes you may place neare
any other kinde of fruit, because their sent is so strong and peircing,
that it will enter into any fruit, and cleane take way his naturall
rellish: the time of their gathering is euer in October, and the meetest
place to lay them in is where they may haue most ayre, so they may lye
dry (for wet they can by no meanes indure,) also they must not lye
close, because the smell of them is both strong & vnwholsome: the beds
whereon they must lye must be of sweet straw, and you must both turne
them and shift them very often, or else they will rot speedily: for the
transporting or carying them any long iourney, you must vse them in all
things as you vse your Peares, & the carriage will be safe.
{SN: Of Nuts.}
For Nuts, of what sort soeuer they be, you shall know they are ripe as
soone as you perceiue them a little browne within the huske, or as it
were ready to fall out of the same, the skill therefore in preseruing of
them long from drynesse, is all that can be desired at the Fruiterers
hands: for as touching the gathering of them, there is no scruple to be
obserued, more then to gather them cleane from the tree, with the helpe
of hookes and such like, for as touching the bruising of them, the shell
is defence sufficient. After they be gathered, you shall shale them, and
take them cleane out of their huskes, and then for preseruing them from
either Wormes or drynesse, it shall be good to lay them in some low
cellar, where you may couer them with sand, being first put into great
bagges or bladders: some french-men are of opinion that if you put them
into vessels made of Wal-nut-tree, and mixe Iuy-berries amongst them, it
will preserue them moist a long time: others thinke, but I haue found it
vncertaine, that to preserue Nuts in Honey will keepe them all the yeere
as greene, moist, and pleasant, as when they hung vpon the tree: The
Dutch-men vse (and it is an excellent practise) to take the crusht
Crabbes (after your verdiuyce is strained out of them) and to mixe it
with their Nuts, and so to lay them in heapes, and it will preserue them
long: or otherwise if they be to be transported, to put them into
barrells and to lay one layre of crusht Crabbes, and another of Nuts,
vntill the barrell be filled, and then to close them vp, and set them
where they may stand coole. But aboue all these foresayd experiments,
the best way for the preseruing of Nuts is to put them into cleane
earthen pots, and to mixe with them good store of salt and then closing
the pots close, to set them in some coole cellar, and couer them all
ouer with sand, and there is no doubt but they will keepe coole,
pleasant, and moist, vntill new come againe, which is a time fully
conuenient.
{SN: Of Grapes.}
Now to conclude, for the keeping of Grapes, you shall first vnderstand
that the best time for their gathering is in the wane of the Moone, and
about the midst of October, as for the knowledge of his ripenesse it is
euer at such time as his first colour is cleane altered, for all Grapes
before they be ripe are of a deepe, thicke, greene, colour, but after
they be ripe, they are either of a blewish redde, or of a bright shining
pale greene. Now for the preseruing them for our english vse, which is
but onely for a fruit-dish at our Tables, for neither our store, nor our
soyle, affords vs any for the wine-presse, some thinke it good, after
they are gotten, to lay them in fine dry sand, or to glasse them vp in
close glasses, where the ayre cannot peirce, will keepe them long, both
full, plumpe, and sweet, but in my conceit the best course is after they
are gotten to hang them vpon strings bunch by bunch, in such places of
your house as they may take the ayre of the fire, and they will last
longest, and keepe the sweetest.
CHAP. X.
_Of the making of Cyder, or Perry._
Cyder is a certaine liquor or drinke made of the iuyce of Apples, and
Perrye the like, made of Peares, they are of great vse in France, and
very wholsome for mans body, especially at the Sea, and in hot
Countries: for they are coole and purgatiue, and doe preuent burning
agues: with vs here in England Cyder is most made in the West parts, as
about Deuon-shire & Cornwaile, & Perry in Worcester-shire,
Glocester-shire, & such like, where indeede the greatest store of those
kindes of fruits are to be found: the manner of making them is, after
your fruit is gotten, you shall take euery Apple, or Peare, by it selfe,
and looking vpon them, picke them cleane from all manner of filthinesse,
as bruisings, rottennesse, worme-eating, and such like, neither leaue
vpon them any stalkes, or the blacke buddes which are and grow vpon the
tops of the fruit, which done you shall put them in to some very cleane
vessell, or trough, and with beetells, made for the purpose, bruise or
crush the Apples or Peares in peeces, & so remoue them into other cleane
vessells, till all the fruit be bruised: then take a bagge of
hayre-cloath, made at least a yard, or three quarters, square, and
filling it full of the crusht fruit, put it in a presse of woode, made
for the purpose, and presse out all the iuyce and moisture out of the
fruit, turning and tossing the bagge vp and downe, vntill there be no
more moisture to runne forth, and so baggefull after baggefull cease not
vntill you haue prest all: wherein you are especially to obserue, that
your vessells into which you straine your fruit be exceeding neate,
sweet, and cleane, and there be no place of ill fauour, or annoyance
neare them, for the liquour is most apt, especially Cyder, to take any
infection. As soone as your liquor is prest forth and hath stoode to
settle, about twelue houres, you shall then turne it vp into sweet
hogsheads, as those which haue had in them last, either White-wine or
Clarret, as for the Sacke vessell it is tollerable, but not excellent:
you may also if you please make a small long bagge of fine linnen
cloath, and filling it full of the powder of Cloues, Mace, Cynamon,
Ginger, and the dry pils of Lemons, and hang it with a string at the
bung-hole into the vessell, and it will make either the Cyder, or Perry,
to tast as pleasantly as if it were Renish-wine, and this being done you
shall clay vp the bung-hole with clay and salt mixt together, so close
as is possible. And thus much for the making of Perry or Cyder.
CHAP. XI.
_Of the Hoppe-garden, and first of the ground and situation thereof._
{SN: Fit ground for Hoppes.}
That the Hoppe is of great vse and commoditie in this kingdome, both the
Beare, which is the generall and perfect drinke of our Nation, and our
dayly traffique, both with France, the low-Countries, and other nations,
for this commoditie, is a continuall testimony, wherefore the first
thing to be considered of in this worke, is the goodnesse and aptnesse
of the ground for the bringing forth of the fruit thereof, wherein I
thus farre consent with Maister _Scot_, that I doe not so much respect
the writings, opinions, and demonstrations, of the Greeke, Latine, or
French authors, who neuer were acquainted with our soyles, as I doe the
dayly practise and experience which I collect, both from my owne
knowledge, and the labours of others my Countrymen, best seene and
approued in this Art: therefore to come to my purpose, you shal
vnderstand that the light sand, whether it be redde or white, being
simple and vnmixed is most vnfit for the planting of Hoppes, because
that through the barrainenesse, it neither hath comfort for the roote,
nor through his seperate lightnesse, any strong hould to maintaine and
keepe vp the poales: likewise the most fertill rich, blacke clay, which
of all soyles is the best and most fruitfull, is not to be allowed for a
Hoppe garden, because his fatnesse and iuyce is so strong that the roote
being as it were ouer-fedde, doth make the branches bring forth leaues
in such infinite abundance that they leaue neither strength nor place
for the fruit, either to knit, or put forth his treasure, as I haue
seene by experience in many places: as for the earth which is of a
morish, blacke, wet nature, and lyeth low, although I haue often times
seene good Hoppes to grow thereupon, being well trencht, and the hils
cast high to the best aduantage, yet it is not the principall ground of
all others, because it is neuer long lasting, but apt to decay and grow
past his strength of bearing. The grounds then which I haue generally
seene to beare the best Hoppes, and whose natures doe the longest
continue with such fruit, are those mixt earthes which are clayes with
clayes, as blacke with white, or clayes and sands of any sorts, wherein
the soyle is so corrected as neither too much fatnesse doth suffocate,
nor too much leannesse doth pine: for I had euer rather haue my
Hoppe-garden desire increase, then continually labour in abatement. And
although some doe exceedingly condemne the chauke-ground for this vse,
yet I haue not at any time seene better Hoppes, or in more plenty, then
in such places, as at this day may be seene in many places about
Hartford-shire. To conclude, though your best mixt earths bring forth
the best Hoppes, yet there is no soyle, or earth, of what nature soeuer
it be (if it lye free from inundation) but will bring forth good Hoppes,
if it be put into the hands of an experienced workman.
{SN: Of the Situation.}
Now, for the situation or site of your Hoppe-garden: you shall so neare
as you can place it neare some couer or shelter, as either of hils,
houses, high-walles, woodes or trees, so those woodes or trees be not so
neare that they may drop vpon your Hoppe hils, for that will kill them:
also the nearer it is planted to your dwelling house it is somuch the
better, both because the vigilance of your owne eye is a good guarde
thereunto, and also the labours of your work-Maister will be more
carefull and diligent. A Hop-garden as it delighteth much in the
pleasantnesse of the sunne, so it cannot endure by any meanes, the
sharpenesse of the windes, frosts, or Winter weather, and therefore your
onely care is your defence and shelter. For the bignesse of your ground,
it must be ordered according to your abillitie or place of trade for
that commoditie, for if you shall haue them but for your owne vse, then
a roode or two roodes will be inough, albeit your house keeping match
with Nobillitie: but if you haue them for a more particuler profit,
then you may take an Aker, two or three, according to your owne
discretion; wherein you shall euer keepe these obseruations: that one
mans labour cannot attend aboue two thousand fiue hundred hils, that
euery roode will beare two hundred and fiftie hils, euery hill beare at
least two pounds and an halfe of Hoppes, (which is the iust quantitie
that will serue to brew one quarter of Malt) and that euery hundred
waight of Hoppes, is at the least, in a reasonable yeere, worth
foure-nobles the hundred: so that euery roode of ground thus imployed,
cannot be lesse worth, at the meanest reckoning, then sixe pounds by the
yeere: for if the ground be principall good for the purpose, and well
ordered, the profit will be much greater, in as much as the bells of the
Hoppes will be much greater, full, and more waighty: And thus much for
the ground and situation.
CHAP. XII.
_Of the ordering of the Garden, and placing of the Hils._
As soone as you haue chosen out your platforme of ground, you shal
either by ploughing, or digging, or by both, make it as flat & leuell as
is possible, vnlesse it be any thing subiect vnto water, and then you
shall giue it some small desent, and with little trenches conuaye the
water from annoying it: you shall also the yeere before you either make
hill or plant it with Hoppe-rootes, sowe it all ouer with hempe, which
will not onely kill, and stifle all sorts of weeds, but also rot the
greene-swarth, and make the mould mellow, and apt to receiue the rootes
when they come to be planted.
Now, as soone as your ground is thus prepared, you shall then take a
line, and with it measure your ground ouerthwart, and to euery hill
allow at least three foote of ground euery way, and betwixt hill and
hill, at the least sixe foote distance: and when you haue marked thus
the number of thirty or forty places, where your hils shall be placed,
intending euer that the time of yeere for this worke must be about the
beginning of Aprill, you shall then in the center, or midde part of
these places made for the site of your hils, digge small square holes of
a foote square each way, and a full foote deepe, and in these holes you
shall set your Hoppe-rootes, that is to say, in euery hole at least
three rootes, and these three rootes you shall ioyne together in such
wise that the toppes of them may be of one equall height, and agreeing
with the face or vpper part of the earth, you shall set them straight
and vpright, and not seperating them, as many doe, and setting at each
corner of the hole a roote, neither shall you twist them, and set both
ends vpward, nor lay them flat or crosse-wise in the earth, neither
shall you make the hils first and set the rootes after, nor immediately
vpon the setting cast great hils vpon them, all which are very vilde
wayes for the setting of Hoppes, but, as before I sayd, hauing ioyned
your rootes together, you shall place them straight and vpright, and so
holding them in one hand, with the other put the moulds close, firme,
and perfectly about them, especially to each corner of the hole, which
done you shall likewise couer the sets themselues all ouer with fine
moulds, at least two fingers thicke, and in this sort you shall plant
all your garden quite ouer, making the sites for your hill to stand in
rowes and rankes, in such order that you may haue euery way betweene the
hils small alleyes and passages, wherein you may goe at pleasure from
hill to hill, without any trouble or annoyance, according to that forme
which I haue before prescribed touching the placing of your Apple-trees
in each seuerall quarter in your Orchard: and herein you are to
vnderstand, that in this first yeere of planting your Hoppe-garden you
shall by no meanes fashion or make any great hils, but onely raise that
part of the earth where your plants are set, some two or three fingers
higher then the ordinary ground.
{SN: The choise of Rootes.}
Now, before I proceede any further, I thinke it not amisse to speake
some thing touching the choise, gathering and trimming of Hoppe-rootes:
wherefore you shall vnderstand that about the latter end of March is the
best gathering of Hoppe-rootes, which so neare as you can you shall
select out of some garden of good reputation, which is both carefully
kept, and by a man of good knowledge, for there euery thing being
preserued in his best perfection, the rootes will be the greatest and
most apt to take: and in the choise of your rootes you shall euer chuse
those which are the greatest, as namely, such as are at the least three
or foure inches about, & ten inches long, let euery roote containe about
three ioynts, and no more, and in any case let them be the cyons of the
last yeeres growth: if they be perfectly good they haue a great greene
stalke with redde streakes, and a hard, broad, long, greene, bell; if
they be otherwise, as namely, wilde-Hoppes, then they are small and
slender, like thriddes, their colour is all redde, euen when it is at
least three yards high, whereas the best Hoppe carieth his reddish
colour not three foote from the earth. Now hauing gotten such rootes as
are good and fit for your purpose, if the season of the weather, or
other necessitie hinder you from presently setting them, you shall then
either lay them in some puddle, neare to your garden, or else bury them
in the ground, vntill fit time for their planting: and of the two it is
better to bury them then lay them in puddle, because if you so let them
lye aboue xxiiij. houres, the rootes will be spoyled.
Now after you haue in manner aforeshewed, planted your garden with
rootes, it shall not be amisse, if the place be apt to such annoyance,
to pricke vpon the site of euery hill a few sharpe Thornes to defend
them from the scratching of poultry, or such like, which euer are busie
to doe mischeife: yet of all house-fowle Geese be the worst, but if your
fence be as it ought, high, strong, and close, it will both preuent
their harme and this labour.
{SN: Of Poales.}
Next vnto this worke is the placing of Poales, of which we will first
speake of the choise thereof, wherein if I discent from the opinion of
other men, yet imagine I set downe no Oracle, but referre you to the
experience or the practise, and so make your owne discreation the
arbiter betweene our discentions. It is the opinion of some, that
Alder-poales are most proper and fit for the Hoppe-garden, both that the
Hoppe taketh, as they say, a certaine naturall loue to that woode, as
also that the roughnesse of the rinde is a stay & benefit to the growth
of the Hoppe: to all which I doe not disagree, but that there should be
found Alder-poales of that length, as namely, xvj. or xviij. foote long,
nine, or ten, inches in compasse, and with all rush-growne, straight,
and fit for this vse, seemeth to mee as much as a miracle, because in my
life I haue not beheld the like, neither doe I thinke our kingdome can
afford it, vnlesse in some such especiall place where they are purposely
kept and maintained, more to shew the art of their maintenance, then the
excellency of their natures: in this one benefit, and doutlesse where
they are so preserued, the cost of their preseruation amounteth to more
than the goodnesse of their extraordinary quallitie, which mine author
defends to the contrary, giuing them a larger prerogatiue, in that they
are cheaper to the purse, more profitable to the plant, and lesse
consumption to the common-wealth: but I greatly doubt in the
approbation, and therefore mine aduise is not to rely onely vpon the
Alder, and for his preheminence imagine all other poales insufficient:
but be assured that either, the Oake-poale, the Ashe, the Beeche, the
Aspe, or Maple, are euery way as good, as profitable, and by many
degrees much longer lasting.
{SN: The proportion of the Poale.}
{SN: Of cutting and erecting Poales.}
Now, if it be so that you happen to liue in the champian Country, as for
the most part Northampton shire, Oxford-shire, some parts of Leycester
and Rutland are, or in the wet and low Countries, as Holland, and Kesten
in Lincolne-shire, or the Ile of Elye in Cambridge-shire, all which
places are very barraine of woode, and yet excellent soyles to beare
Hoppes, rather then to loose the commoditie of the Hoppe-garden I wish
you to plant great store of Willowes, which will afforde you poales as
sufficient as any of the other whatsoeuer, onely they are not so long
lasting, and yet with carefull and dry keeping, I haue seene them last
full out seauen yeeres, a time reasonably sufficient for any young
woode, for such a vse. Thus you see the curiositie is not very great of
what woode so euer your poale be, so it be of young and cleane growth,
rush-growne, (that is to say, biggest at the neather end) eighteene
foote in length, and ten inches in compasse. These poales you shall cut
and prepare betwixt the feast of Al-Saints, and Christmas, and so pile
them vp in some dry place, where they may take no wet, vntill it be
midde-Aprill, at which time (your Hoppes being shot out of the ground at
least three quarters of a yarde, so that you may discerne the principall
cyons which issue from the principall rootes) you shall then bring your
poales into the garden, and lay them along in the alleyes, by euery hill
so many poales as shall be sufficient for the maine branches, which
happely the first yeere will not be aboue two or three poales at the
most to a hill, but in processe of time more, as foure or fiue,
according to the prosperitie of the plants, and the largenesse of the
hils. After you haue thus layd your poales, you shall then beginne to
set them vp in this sort: first, you shall take a gaue-locke, or crow of
iron, and strike it into the earth so neare vnto the roote of the Hoppe
as is possible, prouided alwayes that you doe not bruise, or touch the
roote, and so stroake after stroake, cease not striking till you haue
made a hoale at least two foote deepe, and make them a little slantwise
inward towards the hill, that the poales in their standing may shoote
outwards and hould their greatest distance in the toppes: this done you
shall place the poales in those hoales, thus made with the iron crow,
and with another peece of woode, made rammer-wise, that is to say, as
bigge at the neather end as the biggest part of the poale, or somewhat
more, you shall ramme in the poales, and beate the earth firme and hard
about them: alwayes prouided, that you touch not any branch, or as
little as you may beate with your rammer within betweene the poales,
onely on the out-side make them so fast that the winde, or weather, may
not disorder or blow them downe: then lay to the bottome of euery poale
the branch which shall ascend it, and you shall see in a short space,
how out of their owne natures, they will imbrace and climbe about them.
Now, if it happen after your Hoppes are growne vp, yet not come to their
full perfection, that any of your poales chance to breake, you shall
then take a new poale, and with some soft greene rushes, or the inmost
greene barke of an Alder-tree, tye the toppe of the Hoppe to the toppe
of the new poale, then draw the broken poale out of the Hoppe (I meane
that part which being broken lyeth vpon the ground) and as you saw it
did winde about the olde poale (which is euer the same way that the
sunne runnes) so you shall winde it about the new poale: then loosening
the earth a little from the neather part of the broken poale, you may
with your owne strength pull it cleane out of the earth, and place the
new poale in his roome. Now, there be some which are exceeding curious
in pulling vp these olde poales, and rather then they will shake the
earth, or loosen the mould, they will make a paire of large pincers, or
tarriers of iron, at least fiue foote long with sharpe teeth, and a
clasping hooke to hould the teeth together, when they haue taken fast
hould vpon the poale so neare the earth as is possible, and then laying
a peice of woode vnder the tarriers, and poysing downe the other ends to
rest the poale out of the earth without any disturbance, the modell or
fashion of which instrument is contained in this figure:
{Illustration}
This instrument is not to be discommended, but to be held of good vse,
either in binding grounds where the earth hardneth and houldeth the
poale more then fast, or in the strength and heate of summer, when the
drynesse of the mould will by no meanes suffer the poale to part from
it: but otherwise it is needlesse and may without danger be omitted.
As soone as you haue sufficiently set euery hill with poales, and that
there is no disorder in your worke, you shall when the Hoppes beginne to
climbe, note if their be any cyons or branches which doe forsake the
poales, and rather shoote alongst the ground then looke vp to their
supporters, and all such as you shall so finde, you shall as before I
sayd, either with soft greene rushes, or the greene barke of Elder, tye
them gently vnto the poales, and winde them about, in the same course
that the sunne goes, as oft as conueniently you can: and this you shall
doe euer after the dew is gone from the ground, and not before, and this
must be done with all possible speede, for that cyon which is the
longest before it take vnto the poale is euer the worst and brings forth
his fruit in the worst season.
{SN: Of the Hils.}
Now, as touching the making of your hils, you shall vnderstand that
although generally they are not made the first yeere, yet it is not
amisse if you omit that scruple, and beginne to make your hils as soone
as you haue placed your poales, for if your industry be answerable to
the desert of the labour, you shall reape as good profit the first
yeere, as either the second or the third. To beginne therefore to make
your hils, you shall make you an instrument like a stubbing Hoe, which
is a toole wherewith labourers stubbe rootes out of decayed woode-land
grounds, onely this shall be somewhat broader and thinner, somewhat in
fashion (though twice so bigge) vnto a Coopers Addes, with a shaft at
least foure foote long: some onely for this purpose vse a fine paring
spade, which is euery way as good, and as profitable, the fashion of
which is in this figure.
{Illustration}
With this paring spade, or hoe, you shall pare vp the greene-swarth and
vppermost earth, which is in the alleyes betweene the hils, and lay it
vnto the rootes of the Hoppes, raising them vp like small Mole-hils, and
so monthly increasing them all the yeere through, make them as large as
the site of your ground will suffer, which is at least foure or fiue
foote ouerthwart in the bottome, and so high as conueniently that height
will carry: you shall not by any meanes this first yeere decay any cyons
or branches which spring from the hils, but maintaine them in their
growth, and suffer them to climbe vp the poales, but after the first
yeere is expired you shall not suffer aboue two or three cyons, at the
most, to rise vpon one poale. After your hils are made, which as before
I sayd would be at least foure or fiue foote square in the bottome, and
three foote high, you shall then diligently euery day attend your
garden, and if you finde any branches that being risen more then halfe
way vp the poales, doe then forsake them and spread outward, dangling
downe, then you shall either with the helpe of a high stoole, on which
standing you may reach the toppe of the poale, or else with a small
forckt sticke, put vp the branch, and winde it about the poale: you
shall also be carefull that no weeds or other filthinesse grow about the
rootes of your Hoppes to choake them, but vpon the first discouery to
destroy them.
CHAP. XIII.
_Of the gathering of Hoppes, and the preseruing of the Poales._
Touching the gathering of Hoppes you shall vnderstand that after Saint
_Margarets_ day they beginne to blossome, if it be in hot and rich
soyles, but otherwise not till Lammas: likewise in the best soyles they
bell at Lammas, in the worst at Michaelmas, and in the best earth they
are full ripe at Michaelmas, in the worst at Martillmas; but to know
when they are ripe indeede, you shall perceiue the seede to loose his
greene colour, and looke as browne as a Hares backe, wherefore then you
shall with all dilligence gather them, and because they are a fruit that
will endure little or no delay, as being ready to fall as soone as they
be ripe, and because the exchange of weather may breede change in your
worke, you shall vpon the first aduantage of faire weather, euen so
soone as you shall see the dewe exhaled and drawne from the earth, get
all the ayde of Men, Women, and children which haue any vnderstanding,
to helpe you, and then hauing some conuenient empty barne, or shedde,
made either of boards or canuas, neare to the garden, in which you shall
pull your Hoppes, you shall then beginne at the nearest part of the
garden, and with a sharpe garden knife cut the stalkes of the Hoppes
asunder close by the toppes of the hils; and then with a straite forke
of iron, made broad and sharpe, for the purpose, shere vp all the
Hoppes, and leaue the poales naked. Then hauing labouring persons for
the purpose, let them cary them vnto the place where they are to be
puld; and in any case cut no more then presently is caryed away as fast
as they are cut, least if a shower of raine should happen to fall, and
those being cut and taking wet, are in danger of spoyling. You shall
prouide that those which pull your Hoppes be persons of good discretion,
who must not pull them one by one, but stripe them roundly through their
hands into baskets, mixing the young budds and small leaues with them,
which are as good as any part of the Hoppe whatsoeuer. After you haue
pulled all your Hoppes and carried them into such conuenient dry roomes
as you haue prepared for that purpose, you shall then spread them vpon
cleane floares, so thinne as may be, that the ayre may passe thorrow
them, least lying in heapes they sweat, and so mould, before you can
haue leasure to dry them. After your Hoppes are thus ordered, you shall
then cleanse your garden of all such Hoppe-straw, and other trash, as in
the gathering was scattered therein: then shall you plucke vp all your
Hoppe-poales, in manner before shewed, and hauing either some dry
boarded house, or shed, made for the purpose, pile then one vpon
another, safe from winde or weather, which howsoeuer some that would
haue their experience, like a Collossus, seeme greater then it is, doe
disalow, yet it is the best manner of keeping of poales, and well worthy
the charge: but for want of such a house, it shall not be amisse to take
first your Hoppe-straw, and lay it a good thicknesse vpon the ground,
and with sixe strong stakes, driuen slant-wise into the earth, so as the
vppermost ends may be inward one to another, lay then your Hoppe-poales
betweene the stakes, and pile them one vpon another, drawing them
narrower and narrower to the top, and then couer them all ouer with more
Hoppe-straw, and so let them rest till the next March, at which time
you shall haue new occasion to vse them.
{SN: Winter businesse.}
As soone as you haue piled vp your Hoppe-poales, dry and close, then you
shall about mid-Nouember following throw downe your hils, and lay all
your rootes bare, that the sharpenesse of the season may nip them, and
keepe them from springing too earely: you shall also then bring into the
garden olde Cow-dunge, which is at least two yeeres olde, for no new
dunge is good, and this you shall lay in some great heape in some
conuenient place of the garden vntill Aprill, at which time, after you
haue wound your Hoppes about your poales, you shall then bestow vpon
euery hill two or three spade-full of the Manure mixt with earth, which
will comfort the plant and make it spring pleasantly.
After your hils are puld downe, you shall with your garden spade, or
your hoe, vndermine all the earth round about the roote of the Hoppe,
till you come to the principall rootes thereof, and then taking the
youngest rootes in your hand, and shaking away the earth, you shall see
how the new rootes grow from the olde sets, then with a sharpe knife cut
away all those rootes as did spring the yeere before, out of your sets,
within an inch and an halfe of the same, but euery yeere after the first
you shall cut them close by the olde rootes. Now, if you see any rootes
which doe grow straight downward, without ioynts, those you shall not
cut at all, for they are great nourishers of the plant, but if they grow
outward, or side-wayes, they are of contrary natures, and must
necessarily be cut away. If any of your Hoppes turne wilde, as oft it
happens, which you shall know by the perfect rednesse of the branch,
then you shall cut it quite vp, and plant a new roote in his place.
After you haue cut and trimmed all your rootes, then you shall couer
them againe, in such sort as you were taught at the first planting them,
and so let them abide till their due time for poaling.
CHAP. XIIII.
_Of drying, and not drying of Hoppes, and of packing them when they are
dried._
Although there be much curiositie in the drying of Hoppes as well in the
temperature of heate (which hauing any extremitie, as either of heate,
or his contrary, breedeth disorder in the worke) as also in the framing
of the Ost or furnace after many new moulds and fashions, as variable as
mens wits and experiences, yet because innouations and incertainty doth
rather perplexe then profit, I will shunne, as much as in me lyeth, from
loading the memory of the studious Husbandman with those stratagems
which disable his vnderstanding from the attaining of better perfection,
not disalowing any mans approued knowledge, or thinking that because
such a man can mend smoking Chimnyes, therefore none but hee shall haue
license to make Chimnyes, or that because some men can melt Mettall
without winde, therefore it shall be vtterly vnlawfull to vse bellowes:
these violent opinions I all together disacknowledge, and wish euery one
the liberty of his owne thoughts, and for mine English Husband, I will
shew him that way to dry his Hoppes which is most fit for his profit,
safe, easie, and without extraordinary expences.
First then to speake of the time which is fittest for the drying of your
Hoppes, it is immediately as soone as they are gotten, if more vrgent
occasions doe not delay the businesse, which if they happen, then you
haue a forme before prescribed how to preserue them from mouldinesse and
putrifaction till you can compasse fit time to effect the worke in. The
manner of drying them is vpon a Kilne, of which there be two sorts, that
is to say, an English Kilne, and a French Kilne: the English Kilne being
composed of woode, lath, and clay, and therefore subiect to some danger
of fire, the French, of bricke, lime, and sand, and therefore safe,
close, and without all perill, and to be preferred much before the
other: yet because I haue hereafter more occasion to speake of the
nature, fashion, and edifice of Kilnes in that part of this Volumne
where I intreate of Malting, I will cease further to mention them then
to say that vpon a Kilne is the best drying your Hoppes, after this
manner, hauing finely bedded your Kilne with Wheate-straw, you shall lay
on your hayre cloath, although some disallow it, but giue no reason
therefore, yet it cannot be hurtfull in any degree, for it neither
distasteth the Hoppes, nor defendeth them from the fire, making the
worke longer then it would, but it preserueth both the Hoppes from
filthynesse, and their seede from losse: when your hayre-cloath is
spread, you shall cause one to deliuer you vp your Hoppes in baskets,
which you shall spread vpon the cloath, all ouer the Kilne, at the least
eight inches thicke, and then comming downe, and going to the hole of
the Kilne, you shall with a little dry straw kindle the fire, and then
maintaining it with more straw, you shall keepe a fire a little more
feruent then for the drying of a kilne-full of Malt, being assured that
the same quantitie of fuell, heate, and time, which dryeth a kilne-full
of Malt, will also dry a kilne-full of Hoppes, and if your Kilne will
dry twenty strikes, or bushels of Malt at one drying, then it will dry
forty of Hoppes, because being layd much thicker the quantitie can be no
lesse then doubled, which is a speede all together sufficient, and may
very well serue to dry more Hoppes then any one man hath growing in this
kingdome.
Now, for as much as some men doe not alow to dry Hoppes with straw, but
rather preferre woode, and of woode still to chuse the greenest, yet I
am of a contrary opinion, for I know by experience that the smoake which
proceedeth from woode, (especially if it be greene woode) being a strong
and sharpe vapour, doth so taint and infect the Hoppes that when those
Hoppes come to be brewed with, they giue the drinke a smoakie taste,
euen as if the Malt it selfe had beene woode-dryed: the vnpleasantnesse
whereof I leaue to the iudgement of them that haue trauelled in
York-shire, where, for the most part, is nothing but woode-dryed Malt
onely.
That you may know when your Hoppes are dry inough, you shall take a
small long sticke, and stirring the Hoppes too and fro with it, if the
Hoppes doe russell and make a light noyse, each as it were seperating
one from another, then they are altogether dry inough, but if in any
part you finde them heauy or glewing one to another, then they haue not
inough of the fire: also when they are sufficiently and moderately dryed
they are of a bright-browne colour, little or nothing altered from that
they held when they were vpon the stalke, but if they be ouer dryed,
then their colour will be redde: and if they were not well ordered
before they were dryed, but suffered either to take wet or mould, then
they will looke blacke when they are dry.
{SN: Of the drying Hoppes.}
There be some which are of opinion that if you doe not dry your Hoppes
at all, it shall be no losse, but it is an errour most grose, for if
they be not dryed, there is neither profit in their vse, nor safty in
preseruing them.
As soone as your Hoppes are sufficiently dryed, you shall by the
plucking vp of the foure corners of your hayre-cloath thrust all your
Hoppes together, and then putting them into baskets, carry them into
such dry places as you haue prepared of purpose to lay them in, as
namely, either in dry-fats, or in garners, made either of plaster, or
boards: and herein you shall obserue to packe them close and hard
together, which will be a meanes that if any of them be not dry, yet the
heate they shall get by such lying will dry them fully and make them fit
for seruice.
{SN: Of packing Hoppes.}
Now to conclude, if your store of Hoppes be so great that you shall
trade or make Marchandize of them, then either to conuay them by land or
Sea, it is best that you packe them into great bagges of canuas, made in
fashion of those bagges which woole-men vse, and call them pockets, but
not being altogether so large: these bagges you shall open, and either
hang vp betweene some crosse-beames, or else let downe into some lower
floare, and then putting in your Hoppes cause a man to goe into the
bagge and tread downe the Hoppes, so hard as is possible, pressing downe
basket-full after basket-full, till the bagge be filled, euen vnto the
toppe, and then with an extraordinary packe-thriede, sowing the open end
of the bagge close together, let euery hollow place be crammed with
Hoppes, whilst you can get one hand-full to goe in, and so hauing made
euery corner strong and fast, let them lye dry till you haue occasion
either to shippe or cart them. And thus much for the ordering of Hoppes,
and their vses.
CHAP. XV.
_The office of the Gardiner, and first of the Earth, Situation, and
fencing of a Garden for pleasure._
There is to be required at the hands of euery perfect Gardiner three
especiall vertues, that is to say, _Diligence_, _Industry_, and _Art_:
the two first, as namely, _Diligence_ (vnder which word I comprehend his
loue, care, and delight in the vertue hee professeth) and _Industry_
(vnder which word I conclude his labour, paine, and study, which are the
onely testimonies of his perfection) hee must reape from Nature: for, if
hee be not inclined, euen from the strength of his blood to this loue
and labour, it is impossible he should euer proue an absolute gardiner:
the latter, which containeth his skill, habit, and vnderstanding in what
hee professeth, I doubt not but hee shall gather from the abstracts or
rules which shall follow hereafter in this Treatise, so that where
nature, and this worke shall concurre in one subiect, there is no doubt
to be made, but the professor shall in all points, be able to discharge
a sufficient dutie.
Now, for as much as all our antient and forraine writers (for wee are
very sleightly beholding to our selues for these indeauours) are
exceeding curious in the choise of earth, and situation of the plot of
ground which is meete for the garden: yet I, that am all English
Husbandman, and know our soyles out of the worthinesse of their owne
natures doe as it were rebell against forraine imitation, thinking their
owne vertues are able to propound their owne rules: and the rather when
I call into my remembrance, that in all the forraine places I haue
seene, there is none more worthy then our owne, and yet none ordered
like our owne, I cannot be induced to follow the rules of Italie,
vnlesse I were in Italie, neither those of France, vnlesse I dwelt in
France, nor those of Germany except in Germany I had my habitation,
knowing that the too much heate of the one, or the too much coldnesse of
the other, must rather confound then help in our temperate climate:
whence it comes, that our english booke-knowledge in these cases is both
disgraced and condemned, euery one fayling in his experiments, because
he is guided by no home-bredde, but a stranger; as if to reade the
english tongue there were none better then an Italian Pedant. This to
auoide, I will neither begge ayde nor authoritie from strangers, but
reuerence them as worthies and fathers of their owne Countries.
{SN: Of the ground.}
To speake therefore first of the ground which is fit for the garden,
albeit the best is best worthy, the labour least, and the profit most
certaine, yet it is not meete that you refuse any earth whatsoeuer, both
because a garden is so profitable, necessary, and such an ornament and
grace to euery house and house-keeper, that the dwelling place is lame
and maymed if it want that goodly limbe, and beauty. Besides, if no
gardens should be planted but in the best and richest soyles, it were
infinite the losse we should sustaine in our priuate profit, and in the
due commendations, fit for many worthy workmen, who haue reduced the
worst and barrainest earths to as rare perfection and profit as if they
had beene the onely soyles of this kingdome: and for mine owne part, I
doe not wonder either at the worke of Art or Nature, when I behould in a
goodly, rich, and fertill soyle, a garden adorned with all the delights
and delicacies which are within mans vnderstanding, because the naturall
goodnesse of the earth (which not induring to be idle) will bring forth
whatsoeuer is cast into her: but when I behould vpon a barraine, dry,
and deiected earth, such as the Peake-hils, where a man may behould Snow
all summer, or on the East-mores, whose best hearbage is nothing but
mosse, and iron stone, in such a place, I say, to behould a delicate,
rich, and fruitfull garden, it shewes great worthinesse in the owner,
and infinite Art and industry in the workeman, and makes me both admire
and loue the begetters of such excellencies.
But to returne to my purpose touching the choise of your earth for a
garden, sith no house can conueniently be without one, and that our
English Nation is of that great popularitie, that not the worst place
thereof but is abundantly inhabited, I thinke it meete that you refuse
no earth whatsoeuer to plant your garden vpon, euer obseruing this rule,
that the more barraine it is, the more cost must be bestowed vpon it,
both in Manuring, digging, and in trenching, as shall be shewed
hereafter, and the more rich it is, lesse cost of such labour, and more
curiositie in weeding, proyning, and trimming the earth: for, as the
first is too slow, so the latter is too swift, both in her increase and
multiplication.
Now, for the knowledge of soyles, which is good, and which is badde, I
haue spoken sufficiently already in that part which intreateth of
Tillage, onely this one caueat I will giue you, as soone as you haue
markt out your garden-plot, you shall turne vp a sodde, and taking some
part of the fresh mould, champe it betweene your teeth in your mouth,
and if it taste sweetish then is the mould excellent good and fit to
receiue either seedes or plants, without much Manuring, but if it taste
salt or bitter, then it is a great signe of barrainenesse, and must of
necessitie be corrected with Manure: for saltnesse sheweth much
windinesse, which choaketh and stifleth the seede, and bitternesse that
vnnaturall heate which blasteth it before it sprout.
{SN: Of the situation.}
Now, for the situation of the garden-plot for pleasure, you shall
vnderstand that it must euer be placed so neare vnto the dwelling house
as is possible, both because the eye of the owner may be a guard and
support from inconueniences, as also that the especiall roomes and
prospects of the house may be adorned, perfumed, and inriched, with the
delicate proportions, odorifferous smells, and wholsome ayres which
shall ascend and vaporate from the same, as may more amply be seene in
that former Chapter, where modelling forth the Husbandmans house, I shew
you the site and place for his Garden, onely you must diligently
obserue, that neare vnto this garden doe not stand any houells, stackes
of hay, or Corne, which ouer-pearing the walls, or fence, of the same,
may by reason of winde, or other occasion, annoy the same with straw,
chaffe, seedes, or such like filthinesse, which doth not onely blemish
the beauty thereof, but is also naturally very hurtfull and cankerous to
all plants whatsoeuer. Within this garden plot would be also either some
Well, Pumpe, Conduit, Pond, or Cesterne for water, sith a garden, at
many times of the yeere, requireth much watering: & this place for water
you shall order and dispose according to your abillitie, and the nature
of the soyle, as thus: if both your reputation, and your wealth be of
the lowest account, if then your garden aford you a plaine Well, comely
couered, or a plaine Pump, it shall be sufficient, or if for want of
such springs you digge a fayre Pond in some conuenient part thereof, or
else (which is much better) erect a Cesterne of leade, into which by
pippes may discend all the raine-water which falls about any part of the
house, it will serue for your purpose: but if God haue bestowed vpon you
a greater measure of his blessings, both in wealth & account, if then
insteade of either Well, Pumpe, Pond, or Cesterne, you erect Conduits,
or continuall running Fountaines, composed of Antique workes, according
to the curiositie of mans inuention, it shall be more gallant and
worthy: and these Conduits or water-courses, you may bring in pippes of
leade from other remote or more necessary places of water springs,
standing aboue the leuell of your garden, as euery Artist in the
profession of such workes can more amply declare vnto you, onely for mee
let it be sufficient to let you vnderstand that euery garden would be
accompanied with water.
Also you shall haue great care that there adioyne not vnto your
garden-plot any common-shewers, stinking or muddy dikes, dung-hils, or
such like, the annoyance of whose smells and euill vapors doth not onely
corrupt and breede infection in man, but also cankereth, killeth and
consumeth all manner of plants, especially those which are most
pleasant, fragrant, and odorifferous, as being of tenderest nature and
qualitie: and for this cause diuers will not alow the moating of
garden-plots about, imagining that the ouer great moistnesse thereof,
and the strong smells which doe arise from the mudde in the Summer
season, doe corrupt and putrifie the hearbes and plants within the
compasse of the same, but I am not altogether of that opinion, for if
the water be sweet, or the channell thereof sandy or grauelly, then
there is no such scruple to be taken: but if it be contrary, then it is
with all care to be auoyded, because it is euer a Maxime in this case,
that your garden-plot must euer be compassed with the pleasantest and
sweetest ayre that may be.
The windes which you shall generally defend from your garden, are the
Easterne windes and the Northerne, because they are sharpest, coldest,
and bring with them tempers of most vnseasonablenesse, & albeit in
Italie, Spaine, and such like hot Countries, they rather defend away the
Westerne and Southerne winde, giuing free passage to the East and North,
yet with England it may not be so, because the naturall coldenes of our
Climate is sufficient without any assistance to further bitternesse,
our best industry being to be imployed rather to get warmth, which may
nourish and bring forth our labours, then any way to diminish or weaken
the same.
This plot of ground also would lye, as neare as you can, at the foote or
bottome of an hill, both that the hill may defend the windes and sharpe
weather from the same, as also that you may haue certaine ascents or
risings of state, from leuell to leuell, as was in some sort before
shewed in the plot for the Orchard, and shall be better declared in the
next Chapter.
{SN: Of fencing the garden.}
Now lastly for the fencing or making priuate the garden-plot, it is to
be done according to your abillitie, and the nature of the climate
wherein you liue: as thus, if your reuenewes will reach thereunto, and
matter be to be got, for that purpose, where you liue, then you shall
vnderstand that your best fence is a strong wall, either of Bricke,
Ashler, rough-Stone, or Earth, of which you are the best-owner, or can
with least dammage compasse: but for want either of earth to make
bricke, or quarries out of which to get stone, it shall not then be
amisse to fence your garden with a tall strong pale of seasoned Oake,
fixt to a double parris raile, being lined on the inside with a thicke
quicke-set of white-Thorne, the planting whereof shall be more largely
spoken of where I intreate of fencing onely. But if the place where you
liue in, be so barraine of timber that you cannot get sufficient for the
purpose, then you shall make a studde wall, which shall be splinted and
lomed both with earth and lime, and hayre, and copt vpon the toppe (to
defend away wet) either with tile, slate, or straw, and this wall is
both beautifull, and of long continuance, as may be seene in the most
parts of the South of this kingdome: but if either your pouerty or
climate doe deny you timber for this purpose, you shall then first make
a small trench round about your garden-plot, and set at least foure
rowes of quicke-set of white-Thorne, one aboue another, and then round
about the outside, to defend the quick-set, make a tall fence of dead
woode, being either long, small, brushy poales prickt into the earth,
and standing vpright, and so bound together in the wast betweene two
other poales, according to the figure set downe,
{Illustration}
being so high that not any kinde of Pullen may flie ouer the same, or
else an ordinary hedge of common woode, being beyrded vpon the toppe
with sharpe Thornes, in such wise that not any thing may dare to
aduenture ouer it: and this dead fence you shall repaire and maintaine
as occasion shall require from time to time, till your quicke-set be
growne vp, and, by continuall plashing and interfouldings, be made able
and sufficient to fence and defend your garden, which will be within
fiue or seauen yeeres at the most, and so continue with good order for
euer. And thus much for the situation of gardens.
CHAP. XVI.
_Of the fashion of the garden-plot for pleasure, the Alleyes, Quarters,
Digging and Dungging of the same._
{SN: The fashion.}
After you haue chosen out and fenced your garden-plot, according as is
before sayd, you shall then beginne to fashion and proportion out the
same, sith in the conuayance remaineth a great part of the gardiners
art. And herein you shall vnderstand that there be two formes of
proportions belonging to the garden, the first, onely beautifull, as the
plaine, and single square, contayning onely foure quarters, with his
large Alleyes euery way, as was discribed before in the Orchard: the
other both beautifull and stately, as when there is one, two or three
leuelled squares, each mounting seauen or eight steppes one aboue
another, and euery square contayning foure seuerall Quarters with their
distinct and seuerall Alleyes of equall breadth and proportion; placing
in the center of euery square, that is to say, where the foure corners of
the foure Quarters doe as it were neighbour and meete one another,
either a Conduit of antique fashion, a Standard of some vnusuall deuise,
or else some Dyall, or other Piramed, that may grace and beautifie the
garden. And herein I would haue you vnderstand that I would not haue you
to cast euery square into one forme or fashion of Quarters or Alleyes,
for that would shew little varytie or inuention in Art, but rather to
cast one in plaine Squares, another in Tryangulars, another in
roundalls, & so a fourth according to the worthinesse of conceite, as in
some sort you may behould by these figures, which questionlesse when
they are adorned with their ornaments, will breed infinite delight to
the beholders.
{Illustration: The Plaine Square.}
{Illustration: The Square Triangular or circular.}
{Illustration: The Square of eight Diamonds.}
From the modell of these Squares, Tryangles, and Rounds, any
industrious braine may with little difficulty deriue and fashion to
himselfe diuers other shapes and proportions, according to the nature
and site of the earth, which may appeare more quaint and strange then
these which are in our common vse, albeit these are in the truth of
workmanship the perfect father and mother of all proportions whatsoeuer.
{SN: The ordering of Alleyes.}
Now, you shall vnderstand that concerning the Alleyes and walkes in this
garden of pleasure, it is very meete that your ground, being spacious
and large, (which is the best beauty) that you cut through the midst of
euery Alley an ample and large path or walke, the full depth of the
roote of the greene-swarth, and at least the breadth of seauen or eight
foote: and in this path you shall strow either some fine redde-sand, of
a good binding nature, or else some fine small grauell, or for want of
both them you may take the finest of your pit-coale-dust, which will
both keepe your Alleyes dry and smooth, and also not suffer any grasse
or greene thing to grow within them, which is disgracefull, if it be
suffered: the French-men doe vse, to couer their Alleyes, either with
the powder of marble, or the powder of slate-stone, or else paue them
either with Pit-stone, Free-stone, or Tiles, the first of which is too
hard to get, the other great cost to small purpose, the rather sith our
owne grauell is in euery respect as beautifull, as dry, as strong, and
as long lasting: Onely this heedfulnesse you must diligently obserue,
that if the situation of your garden-plot be low and much subiect to
moisture, that then these middle-cut paths or walkes must be heightned
vp in the midst, and made in a proportionall bent or compasse: wherein
you shall obserue that the out most verdges of the walke must be leuell
with the greene-swarth which holded in each side, and the midst so truly
raised vp in compasse, that the raine which falles may haue a passage to
each side of the greene-swarth. Now, the lesse this compasse is made (so
it auoyde the water, and remaine hard) the better it is, because by
that meanes both the eye shall be deceiued (which shewes art in the
workman) and the more leuell they are, the more ease vnto them which
shall continually walke vpon them.
{SN: Obiection.}
Now, if any shall obiect, why I doe not rather couet to haue these
Alleyes or walkes rather all greene, then thus cut and deuided, sith it
is a most beautifull thing to see a pleasant greene walke, my answere is
this, that first the mixture of colours, is the onely delight of the eye
aboue all other: for beauty being the onely obiect in which it ioyeth,
that beautie is nothing but an excellent mixture, or consent of colours,
as in the composition of a delicate woman the grace of her cheeke is the
mixture of redde and white, the wonder of her eye blacke and white, and
the beauty of her hand blewe and white, any of which is not sayd to be
beautifull if it consist of single or simple colours: and so in these
walkes, or Alleyes, the all greene, nor the all yealow cannot be sayd to
be most beautifull, but the greene and yealow, (that is to say, the
vntroade grasse, and the well knit grauell) being equally mixt, giue the
eye both luster and delight beyonde all comparison.
Againe, to keepe your walkes all greene, or grassy, you must of force
either forbeare to tread vpon them, (which is the vse for which they
were onely fashioned,) or treading vpon them you shall make so many
pathes and ilfauored wayes as will be most vglie to the eye: besides the
dewe and wet hanging vpon the grasse will so annoy you, that if you doe
not select especiall howers to walke in, you must prouide shooes or
bootes of extraordinary goodnesse: which is halfe a depriuement of your
liberty, whereas these things of recreation were created for a contrary
purpose.
Now, you shall also vnderstand that as you make this sandy and smooth
walke through the midst of your Alleyes, so you shall not omit but leaue
as much greene-swarth, or grasse ground of eache side the plaine path as
may fully counteruaile the breadth of the walke, as thus for example: if
your sandy walke be sixe foote broad, the grasse ground of each side
it, shall be at least sixe foote also, so that the whole Alley shall be
at least eighteene foote in breadth, which will be both comely and
stately.
{SN: Of the Quarters.}
Your Alleyes being thus proportioned and set forth, your next worke
shall be the ordering of your Quarters, which as I sayd before, you may
frame into what proportions you please, as into Squares, Tryangles and
Rounds, according to the ground, or your owne inuention: and hauing
marked them out with lines, and the garden compasse, you shall then
beginne to digge them in this manner: first, with a paring spade, the
fashion whereof is formerly shewed, you shall pare away all the
greene-swarth, fully so deepe as the roote of the grasse shall goe, and
cast it away, then with other digging spades you shall digge vp the
earth, at least two foote and a halfe, or three foote deepe, in turning
vp of which earth, you shall note that as any rootes of weedes, or other
quickes shall be raised or stirred vp, so presently with your hands to
gather them vp, and cast them away, that your mould may (as neare as
your dilligence can performe it) be cleane from either wilde rootes,
stones, or such like offences: & in this digging of your Quarters you
shall not forget but raise vp the ground of your Quarters at least two
foote higher then your Alleyes, and where by meanes of such reasure, you
shall want mould, there you shall supply that lacke by bringing mould
and cleane earth from some other place, where most conueniently you may
spare it, that your whole Quarter being digged all ouer, it may rise in
all parts alike, and carry an orderly and well proportioned leuell
through the whole worke.
{SN: Of Dunging.}
The best season for this first digging of your garden mould is in
September: and after it is so digged and roughly cast vp, you shall let
it rest till the latter end of Nouember, at what time you shall digge it
vp againe, in manner as afore sayd, onely with these additions, that you
shall enter into the fresh mould, halfe a spade-graft deeper then
before, and at euery two foote breadth of ground, enlarging the trench
both wide and deepe, fill it vp with the oldest and best Oxe or
Cow-Manure that you can possibly get, till such time that increasing
from two foote to two foote, you haue gone ouer and Manured all your
quarters, hauing a principall care that your dunge or Manure lye both
deepe and thicke, in so much that euery part of your mould may
indifferently pertake and be inriched with the same Manure.
{SN: Diuersitie of Manures.}
Now, you shall vnderstand that although I doe particularly speake but of
Oxe or Cow-Manure, because it is of all the fattest and strongest,
especially being olde, yet their are diuers respects to be had in the
Manuring of gardens: as first, if your ground be naturally of a good,
fat, blacke, and well tempered earth, or if it be of a barraine, sandy,
hot, yet firme mould, that in either of these cases your Oxe, Cow, or
beast Manure is the best & most sufficient, but if it be of a colde,
barraine, or spewing mould then it shall be good to mixe your Oxe-dunge
with Horse-dunge, which shall be at least two yeeres olde, if you can
get it, otherwise such as you can compasse: if your ground be good and
fertill yet out of his drynesse in the summer-time it be giuen to riue
and chappe as is seene in many earths; you shall then mixe your
Oxe-dunge well with Ashes, orts of Lime, and such like: lastly, if your
earth be too much binding and colde therewithall, then mixe your
Oxe-dunge with chalke or marle and it is the best Manure. And thus much
for the generall vse of earths.
Now, for perticular vses you shall vnderstand that for Hearbs or Flowers
the Oxe and Horse-dunge is the best, for rootes or Cabbages, mans ordure
is the best, for Harty-chockes, or any such like thisly-fruit,
Swines-dunge is most sufficient, and thus according to your setled
determination you shall seuerally prouide for euery seuerall purpose,
and so, God assisting, seldome faile in your profit. And this dunge you
shall bring into your garden in little drumblars or wheele-barrowes,
made for the purpose, such as being in common vse in euery Husbandmans
yarde it shall be needlesse here either to shew the figure or
proportion thereof. And thus much for the fashion, digging, and dunging
of gardens.
CHAP. XVII.
_Of the adornation and beautifying of the Garden for pleasure._
The adornation and beautifying of gardens is not onely diuers but almost
infinite, the industry of mens braines hourely begetting and bringing
forth such new garments and imbroadery for the earth, that it is
impossible to say this shall be singular, neither can any man say that
this or that is the best, sith as mens tastes so their fancies are
carried away with the varietie of their affections, some being pleased
with one forme, some with another: I will not therefore giue
preheminence to any one beauty, but discribing the faces and glories of
all the best ornaments generaly or particularly vsed in our English
gardens, referre euery man to the ellection of that which shall best
agree with his fancy.
{SN: Of Knots and Mazes.}
To beginne therefore with that which is most antient and at this day of
most vse amongst the vulgar though least respected with great ones, who
for the most part are wholy giuen ouer to nouelties: you shall
vnderstand that Knots and Mazes were the first that were receiued into
admiration, which Knots or Mazes were placed vpon the faces of each
seuerall quarter, in this sort: first, about the verdge or square of the
quarter was set a border of Primpe, Boxe, Lauandar, Rose-mary, or such
like, but Primpe or Boxe is the best, and it was set thicke, at least
eighteene inches broad at the bottome & being kept with cliping both
smooth and leuell on the toppe and on each side, those borders as they
were ornaments so were they also very profitable to the huswife for the
drying of linnen cloaths, yarne, and such like: for the nature of Boxe
and Primpe being to grow like a hedge, strong and thicke, together, the
Gardiner, with his sheares may keepe it as broad & plaine as himselfe
listeth. Within this border shall your knot or maze be drawne, it being
euer intended that before the setting of your border your quarter shall
be the third time digged, made exceeding leuell, and smooth, without
clot or stone, and the mould, with your garden rake of iron, so broken
that it may lye like the finest ashes, and then with your garden mauls,
which are broad-boards of more then two foote square set at the ends of
strong staues, the earth shall be beaten so hard and firme together that
it may beare the burthen of a man without shrinking. And in the beating
of the mould you shall haue all diligent care that you preserue and
keepe your leuell to a hayre, for if you faile in it, you faile in your
whole worke.
{Illustration}
Now for the time of this labour, it is euer best about the beginning of
February, and indifferent, about the midst of October, but for the
setting of your Primpe, or Boxe-border, let the beginning of Nouember be
your latest time, for so shall you be sure that it will haue taken
roote, and the leafe will flourish in the spring following: at which
time your ground being thus artificially prepared, you shall begin to
draw forth your knot in this manner: first, with lines you shall draw
the forme of the figure next before set downe, and with a small
instrument of iron make it vpon the earth.
{Illustration}
Which done, from the order and proportion of these lines you shall draw
your single knots or plaine knots of the least curiositie, as may
appeare by this figure, being one quarter of the whole Knot: euer
proportioning your Trayles and windings according to the lines there
discribed, which will keepe your worke in iust proportion.
But if you desire to haue knots of much more curiositie being more
double and intricate, then you shall draw your first lines after this
proportion here figured, pinning downe euery line firme to the earth
with a little pinne made of woode.
{Illustration}
Which done you shall draw your double and curious knots after the manner
of the figure following, which is also but one quarter of the whole
knot, for looke in what manner you doe one knot in like sort will the
other three quarters succeede, your lines keeping you in a continuall
euen proportion.
{Illustration}
And in this manner as you draw these knots, with the like helps and
lines also you shall draw out your Mazes, and laborinths, of what sort
or kind soeuer you please, whether they be round or square. But for as
much, as not onely the _Country-farme_, but also diuers other translated
bookes, doe at large describe the manner of casting and proportioning
these knots, I will not persist to write more curiously vpon them, but
wish euery painefull gardiner which coueteth to be more satisfied
therein, to repaire to those authors, where hee shall finde more large
amplifications, and greater diuersities of knots, yet all tending to no
more purpose then this which I haue all ready written.
Now, as soone as you haue drawne forth and figured your knot vpon the
face of your quarter, you shall then set it either with Germander,
Issoppe, Time or Pinke-gilly-flowers, but of all hearbes Germander is
the most principall best for this purpose: diuers doe vse in knots to
set Thrift, and in time of need it may serue, but it is not so good as
any of the other, because it is much subiect to be slaine with frost,
and will also spread vpon the earth in such sort that, without very
painefull cutting, it will put your knot out of fashion.
{SN: Yeallow.}
{SN: White.}
{SN: Blacke.}
{SN: Red.}
{SN: Blew.}
{SN: Greene.}
Now there is another beautifying or adorning of Gardens, and it is most
generally to be seene in the gardens of Noblemen and Gentlemen, which
may beare coate-armor, and that is, instead of the knots and mazes
formerly spoken of, to draw vpon the faces of your quarters such Armes,
or Ensines, as you may either beare your selfe, or will preserue for the
memory of any friend: and these armes being drawne forth in plaine
lines, you shall set those plaine shadowing lines either with Germander,
Issop, or such like hearbes: and then for the more ample beautie
thereof, if you desire to haue them in their proper and liuely colours
(without which they haue but one quarter of their luster) you shall
vnderstand that your colours in Armory are thus to be made. First, for
your mettalls: you shall make your Yeallow, either of a yeallow clay,
vsually to be had almost in euery place, or the yeallowest sand, or for
want of both, of your Flanders Tile, which is to be bought of euery
Iron-monger or Chandelor; and any of these you must beate to dust: for
your White you shall make it of the coursest chalke beaten to dust, or
of well burnt plaister, or, for necessity, of lime, but that will soone
decay: your Blacke is to be made of your best and purest coale-dust,
well clensed and sifted: your Red is to be made of broken vselesse
brickes beaten to dust, and well clensed from spots: your Blew is to be
made of white-chalke, and blacke coale dust mixed together, till the
blacke haue brought the white to a perfect blewnes: lastly your Greene,
both for the naturall property belonging to your Garden, as also for
better continuance and long lasting, you shall make of Camomill, well
planted where any such colour is to be vsed, as for the rest of the
colours, you shall sift them, and strow them into their proper places,
and then with a flat beating-Beetell you shall beate it, and incorporate
it with the earth, and as any of the colours shall decay, you shall
diligently repaire them, and the luster will be most beautifull.
There is also another beautifying of gardens, which although it last not
the whole yeere, yet it is most quaint, rare, and best eye-pleasing, and
thus it is: you shall vpon the face of your quarter draw a plaine double
knot, in manner of billet-wise: for you shall vnderstand that in this
case the plainest knot is the best, and you shall let it be more then a
foote betwixt line and line (for in the largenesse consists much beauty)
this knot being scored out, you shall take Tiles, or tileshreds and fixe
them within the lines of your knot strongly within the earth, yet so as
they may stand a good distance aboue the earth and this doe till you
haue set out all your knot with Tile: then precisely note the seuerall
passages of your knot, and the seuerall thrids of which it consisteth,
and then betwixt your tiles, (which are but as the shadowing lines of
your knot) plant in euery seuerall third, flowers of one kinde and
colour, as thus for example: in one thrid plant your carnation
Gilly-flower, in another your great white Geli flower, in another your
mingle-coloured Gilly-flower, and in another your blood-red
Gilly-flower, and so likewise if you can compasse them you may in this
sort plant your seueral coloured Hyacinths, as the red, the blew, and
the yealow, or your seuerall coloured _Dulippos_, and many other Italian
and french flowers: or you may, if you please, take of euery seuerall
plant one, and place them as afforesaid; the grace of all which is, that
so soone as these flowers shall put forth their beauties, if you stand a
little remote from the knot, and any thing aboue it, you shall see it
appeare like a knot made of diuers coloured ribans, most pleasing and
most rare.
Many other adornations and beautifyings there are which belong to the
setting forth of a curious garden, but for as much as none are more
rare or more esteemed then these I haue set downe, being the best
ornaments of the best gardens of this kingdome, I thinke them tastes
sufficient for euery husbandman, or other of better quality which
delighteth in the beauty and well trimming of his ground.
CHAP. XVIII.
_How for the entertainment of any great Person, in any Parke, or other
place of pleasure, where Sommer-bowers are made, to make a compleat
Garden in two or three dayes._
If the honest English husbandman, or any other, of what quallity soeuer,
shall entertaine any Noble personage, to whom hee would giue the delight
of all strange contentment, either in his Parke, or other remote place
of pleasure, neere vnto Ponds, Riuer, or other waters of cleerenesse,
after hee hath made his arbors and Summer-bowers to feast in, the
fashion whereof is so common that euery labourer can make them, hee
shall then marke out his garden-plot, bestowing such sleight fence
thereon as hee shall thinke fit: then hee shall cast forth his alleys,
and deuide them from his quarters, by paring away the greene-swarth with
a paring spade, finely, and euen, by a direct line (for a line must euer
be vsed in this worke) then hauing store of labourers (after the
vpper-most swarth is taken away) you shall cast vp the quarters, and
then breaking the mould and leuelling it, you shall make sad the earth
againe, then vpon your quarters you shall draw forth either Knots,
Armes, or any other deuise which shall be best pleasing to your fancie,
as either knots with single or double trayles, or other emblemicall
deuise, as Birds, Beasts, and such like: and in your knots where you
should plant hearbes, you shall take greene-sods of the richest grasse,
and cutting it proportionably to the knot, making a fine trench, you
shall lay in your sod, and so ioyning sod to sod close and arteficially,
you shall set forth your whole knot, or the portrayture of your armes,
or other deuise, and then taking a cleane broome that hath not formerly
beene swept withall, you shall brush all vncleanenesse from the grasse,
and then you shall behold your knot as compleat, and as comely as if it
had beene set with hearbes many yeeres before. Now for the portrayture
of any liuing thing, you shall cut it forth, ioyning sod vnto sod, and
then afterward place it into the earth. Now if within this plot of
ground which you make your garden piece there be either naturall or
arteficiall mounts or bankes vpon them, you may in this selfe-same
manner with greene sods set forth a flight, either at field or riuer, or
the manner of hunting of any chase, or any story, or other deuise that
you please, to the infinit admiration of all them which shall behold it:
onely in working against mounts or bankes you must obserue to haue many
small pinnes, to stay your worke and keepe your sods from slipping one
from another, till such time as you haue made euery thing fast with
earth, which you must rame very close and hard: as for Flowers, or such
like adorments, you may the morning before, remoue them with their earth
from some other garden, and plant them at your best pleasure. And thus
much for a garden to be made in the time of hasty necessity.
CHAP. XIX.
_How to preserue Abricots, or any kinde of curious
outlandish-stone-fruit, and make them beare plentifully be the Spring or
beginning of Summer neuer so bitter._
I haue knowne diuers Noblemen, Gentlemen & men of vnder quallitie, that
haue beene most laborious how to preserue these tender stone-fruits from
the violence of stormes, frost and windes, and to that end haue beene at
great cost and charges yet many times haue found much losse in their
labours, wherefore in the end, through the practise of many experiments,
this hath beene found (which I will here set downe) the most approuedst
way to make them beare without all kinde of danger. After you haue
planted your Abricot, or other delicate fruit, and plasht him vp against
a wall in manner as hath beene before declared, you shall ouer the tops
of the trees all along the wall, build a large pentisse, of at least
sixe or seauen foote in length: which pentisse ouer-shaddowing the
trees, will, as experience hath found out, so defend them, that they
will euer beare in as plentifull manner as they haue done any particular
yeere before. There be many that will scoffe, or at least, giue no
credit to this experiment, because it carrieth with it no more
curiositie, but I can assure thee that art the honest English
Husbandman, that there is nothing more certaine and vnfallible, for I
haue seene in one of the greatest Noblemens gardens in the kingdome,
where such a pentisse was made, that so farre as the pentisse went, so
farre the trees did prosper with all fruitfulnesse, and where the
pentisse ended, not one tree bare, the spring-time being most bitter and
wonderfull vnseasonable.
Now I haue seene some great Personages (whose pursses may buy their
pleasures at any rate) which haue in those pentisses fixed diuers strong
hookes of Iron, and then made a canuasse of the best Poldauie, with most
strong loopes, of small corde, which being hung vpon the Iron hookes,
hath reacht from the pentisse to the ground, and so laced with corde and
small pulleys, that like the saile of a ship it might be trust vp, and
let downe at pleasure: this canuasse thus prepared is all the Spring and
latter end of Winter to be let downe at the setting of the Sunne, and to
be drawne vp at the rising of the Sunne againe. The practise of this I
referre to such as haue abillitie to buy their delight, without losse,
assuring them that all reason and experience doth finde it most probable
to be most excellent, yet to the plaine English Husbandman I giue
certaine assurance that the pentisse onely is sufficient enough and will
defend all stormes whatsoeuer. And thus much for the preseruation and
increase of all tender Stone-fruit, of what nature, or climbe bred,
soeuer.
CHAP. XX.
_How to make Grapes grow as bigge, full, and as naturally, and to ripen
in as due season, and be as long lasting as either in Fraunce or Spaine._
Diuers of our English Gardiners, and those of the best and most
approued'st iudgements, haue beene very industrious to bring Grapes, in
our kingdome, to their true nature and perfection: and some great
persons I know, that with infinit cost, and I hope prosperous successe,
hath planted a Vineyard of many Acres, in which the hands of the best
experienced french-men hath beene imploied: but for those great workes
they are onely for great men, and not for the plaine English Husbandman,
neither will such workes by any meanes prosper in many parts of our
kingdome, especially in the North parts: and I that write for the
generall vse, must treate of vniuersall Maximes: therefore if you desire
to haue Grapes in their true and best kinde, most earely and longest
lasting, you shall in the most conuenient part of your garden, which is
euer the center or middle point thereof, build a round house, in the
fashion of a round Doue-coate, but many degrees lower, the ground worke
whereof shalbe aboue the ground two or three brickes thickenesse, vpon
this ground-plot you shall place a groundsell, and thereon, fine, yet
strong studs, which may reach to the roofe: these studs shalbe placed
better then foure foote one from another, with little square bars of
woode, such as you vse in glasse windowes, two betwixt euery two studs,
the roofe you may make in what proportion you will, for this house may
serue for a delicate banqueting house, and you may either couer it with
Leade, Slate or Tile, which you please. Now, from the ground to the top,
betweene the studs, you shall glase it, with very strong glasse, made in
an exceeding large square pane, well leaded and cimented. This house
thus made, you shall obserue that through the bricke worke there be
made, betweene euery two studs, square holes, cleane through into the
house; then on the out-side, opposite against those holes, you shall
plant the roote of your Vine, hauing beene very carefull in the election
and choise thereof: which done, as your Vine groweth you shall draw it
through those holes, and as you vse to plash a Vine against a wall, so
you shall plash this against the glasse window, on the in-side, and so
soone as it shall beginne to beare Grapes you shall be sure to turne
euery bunch, so that it may lye close to the glasse, that the reflection
of the Sunne heating the glasse, that heate may hasten on the ripening,
& increase the groath of your Grapes: as also the house defending off
all manner of euill weather, these Grapes will hang ripe, vnrotted or
withered, euen till Christmas. Thus haue I giuen you a tast of some of
the first parts of English Husbandry, which if I shall finde
thankefully accepted, if it please God to grant mee life, I will in my
next Volumne, shew you the choise of all manner of Garden Hearbes and
Flowers, both of this and other kingdomes, the seasons of their
plantings, their florishings and orderings: I will also shew you the
true ordering of Woodes, both high and low, as also the breeding and
feeding of all manner of Cattell, with the cure of all diseases incident
vnto them, together with other parts of Husbandry, neuer before
published by any Author: this I promise, if God be pleased: to whom be
onely ascribed the glory of all our actions, and whose name be praised
for euer. Amen.
* * * * *
FINIS.
[Transcriber's notes
The following changes have been made and anomalies noted.
A Former Part
Chap. II.
'adicted to nouelty and curiouity' changed to
'adicted to nouelty and curiousity'
Chap. III.
'Plough houlder when hee cometh to' scan is unclear
'two much earth' probable misprint for
'too much earth'
Chap. IIII.
'the of point your share' changed to
'the point of your share'
Chap. V.
'of that which you soil'd:' changed to
'of that which you foil'd:'
Chap. VI.
'the ridge of you land againe.' probable misprint for
'the ridge of your land againe.'
'Tare-Cockle, or such like,' scan is unclear
'After your land is soild,' changed to
'After your land is foild,'
Chap. VII.
'and if you ffnde' changed to 'and if you finde'
'Manure of beasts which can be-gotten' probable misprint for
'Manure of beasts which can be gotten'
'your fould of Seepe' changed to 'your fould of Sheepe'
'frost, winde, and weathe,rmakes' changed to
'frost, winde, and weather, makes'
'no wing accoridng' changed to 'no wing according'
Chap. IX.
'much barrainnesse, espcially' changed to
'much barrainnesse, especially'
'it shall be needlesse to write' scan is unclear
The First Part
Chap. I.
'you most turne euery furrow' probable misprint for
'you must turne euery furrow'
'hee must sooner stirer' changed to
'hee must sooner stirre'. Scan is unclear.
Chap. II.
'euery thing with is most apt' changed to
'euery thing which is most apt'
Chap. III.
'their naturall lighnesse' changed to
'their naturall lightnesse'
'as hath, beene showed before' changed to
'as hath beene showed before'
Chap. IIII.
'it is most, certaine' changed to
'it is most certaine'
'Cornes in their gardens thus, set seeing' changed to
'Cornes in their gardens thus set, seeing'
Chap. V.
'vpon the or fourth field' changed to
'vpon the third or fourth field'
'is ninam Barly,' probable misprint for
'is niam Barly,'
Chap. VI.
'as we see in dayly experience,' changed to
'as we see in dayly experience.'
The Second Part of the First Booke
Chap. I.
'perfect ground-plot, you' scan is unclear
'twelue or fourteene foote on of another,'
probable misprint for
'twelue or fourteene foote one of another,'
'thorny and sharpe, trees,' changed to
'thorny and sharpe trees,'
Chap. IIII.
'you shall tak one of your grafts'
changed to
'you shall take one of your grafts'
Chap. V.
'Grafting betweene the barke.' scan is unclear in sidenote
'not aboue tree grafts at the most' changed to
'not aboue three grafts at the most'
'Grafting on the toppes of trees.' scan is unclear in sidenote
'and to contincu' changed to
'and to continue'
Chap. VI.
'Of the replanting of Trees, and furnishing the Orchard,'
changed to
'Of the replanting of Trees, and furnishing the Orchard.'
Chap. VII.
'it is a ready away' changed to
'it is a ready way'
'two much fertillitie' probable misprint for
'too much fertillitie'
'steepe it Mfor alt' changed to
'steepe it for Malt'
Chap. VIII.
'for any peculyar pofit' changed to
'for any peculyar profit'
Chap. IX.
'and growriuelled' changed to
'and grow riuelled'
'they can by meanes indure,' changed to
'they can by no meanes indure,'
Chap. XI.
'then contiunally labour' changed to
'then continually labour'
Chap. XII
'Of Poales.' scan is unclear in sidenote
Chap. XIIII
'dry more Hoppes then any one man' scan is unclear
Chap. XVII.
'then betwxit your tiles' changed to
'then betwixt your tiles'
Chap. XVIII.
'CHAP: XVIII.' changed to
'CHAP. XVIII.'
'single or double trayles,' scan unclear
Chap. XIX.
'to the pliane English Husbandman' changed to
'to the plaine English Husbandman'
End of Project Gutenberg's The English Husbandman, by Gervase Markham

Nitrogen fixation is a chemical process by which the abundant but relatively inert molecular dinitrogen (N2) is converted into bioavailable nitrogen compounds such as ammonia (NH3) and nitrates (NO3). It occurs both biologically and abiologically, the latter either naturally through weather phenomena (e.g. lightning) or artificially by chemical industries. Biological nitrogen fixation or diazotrophy is catalyzed by enzymes called nitrogenases, produced by microorganisms such as cyanobacteria and rhizobia. These enzyme complexes are encoded by the Nif genes (or Nif homologs) and contain iron, often with a second metal (usually molybdenum, but sometimes vanadium).
Some nitrogen-fixing bacteria have symbiotic relationships with plants, especially legumes, mosses, and aquatic ferns such as Azolla. Looser non-symbiotic relationships between diazotrophs and plants are often referred to as associative, as seen in nitrogen fixation on rice roots. Nitrogen fixation occurs between some termites and fungi. It occurs naturally in the air by means of NOx production by lightning.
Nitrogen fixation is a key component of the nitrogen cycle and is essential to life on Earth, as all vital organic compounds such as DNA and proteins contain nitrogen. Industrial nitrogen fixation, most notably through the Haber process, underpins the manufacture of all nitrogenous industrial products, which include fertilizers, pharmaceuticals, textiles, dyes and explosives.
== History ==
Biological nitrogen fixation was discovered by Jean-Baptiste Boussingault in 1838. Later, in 1880, the process by which it happens was discovered by the German agronomist Hermann Hellriegel and Hermann Wilfarth and was fully described by Dutch microbiologist Martinus Beijerinck.
"The protracted investigations of the relation of plants to the acquisition of nitrogen begun by de Saussure, Ville, Lawes, Gilbert and others, and culminated in the discovery of symbiotic fixation by Hellriegel and Wilfarth in 1887."
"Experiments by Bossingault in 1855 and Pugh, Gilbert & Lawes in 1887 had shown that nitrogen did not enter the plant directly. The discovery of the role of nitrogen-fixing bacteria by Herman Hellriegel and Herman Wilfarth in 1886–1888 would open a new era of soil science."
In 1901, Beijerinck showed that Azotobacter chroococcum was able to fix atmospheric nitrogen. This was the first known species of the Azotobacter genus, so-named by him. It is also the first known diazotroph, species that use diatomic nitrogen as a step in the complete nitrogen cycle.
== Biological ==
Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) occurs when atmospheric nitrogen is converted to ammonia by a nitrogenase enzyme. The overall reaction for BNF is:
N2 + 16ATP + 16H2O + 8e− + 8H+ → 2NH3 +H2 + 16ADP + 16Pi
The process is coupled to the hydrolysis of 16 equivalents of ATP and is accompanied by the co-formation of one equivalent of H2. The conversion of N2 into ammonia occurs at a metal cluster called FeMoco, an abbreviation for the iron-molybdenum cofactor. The mechanism proceeds via a series of protonation and reduction steps wherein the FeMoco active site hydrogenates the N2 substrate. In free-living diazotrophs, nitrogenase-generated ammonia is assimilated into glutamate through the glutamine synthetase/glutamate synthase pathway. The microbial nif genes required for nitrogen fixation are widely distributed in diverse environments.
Nitrogenases are rapidly degraded by oxygen. For this reason, many bacteria cease production of the enzyme in the presence of oxygen. Many nitrogen-fixing organisms exist only in anaerobic conditions, respiring to draw down oxygen levels, or binding the oxygen with a protein such as leghemoglobin.
=== Importance of nitrogen ===
Atmospheric nitrogen cannot be metabolized by most organisms, because its triple covalent bond is very strong. Most take up fixed nitrogen from various sources. For every 100 atoms of carbon, roughly 2 to 20 atoms of nitrogen are assimilated. The atomic ratio of carbon (C) : nitrogen (N) : phosphorus (P) observed on average in planktonic biomass was originally described by Alfred Redfield, who determined the stoichiometric relationship between C:N:P atoms, The Redfield Ratio, to be 106:16:1.
=== Nitrogenase ===
The protein complex nitrogenase is responsible for catalyzing the reduction of nitrogen gas (N2) to ammonia (NH3). In cyanobacteria, this enzyme system is housed in a specialized cell called the heterocyst. The production of the nitrogenase complex is genetically regulated, and the activity of the protein complex is dependent on ambient oxygen concentrations, and intra- and extracellular concentrations of ammonia and oxidized nitrogen species (nitrate and nitrite). Additionally, the combined concentrations of both ammonium and nitrate are thought to inhibit NFix, specifically when intracellular concentrations of 2-oxoglutarate (2-OG) exceed a critical threshold. The specialized heterocyst cell is necessary for the performance of nitrogenase as a result of its sensitivity to ambient oxygen.
Nitrogenase consist of two proteins, a catalytic iron-dependent protein, commonly referred to as MoFe protein and a reducing iron-only protein (Fe protein). Three iron-dependent proteins are known: molybdenum-dependent, vanadium-dependent, and iron-only, with all three nitrogenase protein variations containing an iron protein component. Molybdenum-dependent nitrogenase is most common. The different types of nitrogenase can be determined by the specific iron protein component. Nitrogenase is highly conserved. Gene expression through DNA sequencing can distinguish which protein complex is present in the microorganism and potentially being expressed. Most frequently, the nifH gene is used to identify the presence of molybdenum-dependent nitrogenase, followed by closely related nitrogenase reductases (component II) vnfH and anfH representing vanadium-dependent and iron-only nitrogenase, respectively. In studying the ecology and evolution of nitrogen-fixing bacteria, the nifH gene is the biomarker most widely used. nifH has two similar genes anfH and vnfH that also encode for the nitrogenase reductase component of the nitrogenase complex.
=== Evolution of nitrogenase ===
Nitrogenase is thought to have evolved sometime between 1.5-2.2 billion years ago (Ga), although there is some isotopic support for nitrogenase evolution as early as around 3.2 Ga. Nitrogenase appears to have evolved from maturase-like proteins, although the function of the preceding protein is currently unknown.
Nitrogenase has three different forms (Nif, Anf, and Vnf) that correspond with the metal found in the active site of the protein (molybdenum, iron, and vanadium respectively). Marine metal abundances over Earth's geologic timeline are thought to have driven the relative abundance of which form of nitrogenase was most common. Currently, there is no conclusive agreement on which form of nitrogenase arose first.
=== Microorganisms ===
Diazotrophs are widespread within domain Bacteria including cyanobacteria (e.g. the highly significant Trichodesmium and Cyanothece), green sulfur bacteria, purple sulfur bacteria, Azotobacteraceae, rhizobia and Frankia. Several obligately anaerobic bacteria fix nitrogen including many (but not all) Clostridium spp. Some archaea such as Methanosarcina acetivorans also fix nitrogen, and several other methanogenic taxa, are significant contributors to nitrogen fixation in oxygen-deficient soils.
Cyanobacteria, commonly known as blue-green algae, inhabit nearly all illuminated environments on Earth and play key roles in the carbon and nitrogen cycle of the biosphere. In general, cyanobacteria can use various inorganic and organic sources of combined nitrogen, such as nitrate, nitrite, ammonium, urea, or some amino acids. Several cyanobacteria strains are also capable of diazotrophic growth, an ability that may have been present in their last common ancestor in the Archean eon. Nitrogen fixation not only naturally occurs in soils but also aquatic systems, including both freshwater and marine. Indeed, the amount of nitrogen fixed in the ocean is at least as much as that on land. The colonial marine cyanobacterium Trichodesmium is thought to fix nitrogen on such a scale that it accounts for almost half of the nitrogen fixation in marine systems globally. Marine surface lichens and non-photosynthetic bacteria belonging in Proteobacteria and Planctomycetes fixate significant atmospheric nitrogen. Species of nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria in fresh waters include: Aphanizomenon and Dolichospermum (previously Anabaena). Such species have specialized cells called heterocytes, in which nitrogen fixation occurs via the nitrogenase enzyme.
=== Algae ===
One type of organelle, originating from cyanobacterial endosymbionts called UCYN-A2, can turn nitrogen gas into a biologically available form. This nitroplast was discovered in algae, particularly in the marine algae Braarudosphaera bigelowii.
Diatoms in the family Rhopalodiaceae also possess cyanobacterial endosymbionts called spheroid bodies or diazoplasts. These endosymbionts have lost photosynthetic properties, but have kept the ability to perform nitrogen fixation, allowing these diatoms to fix atmospheric nitrogen. Other diatoms in symbiosis with nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria are among the genera Hemiaulus, Rhizosolenia and Chaetoceros.
=== Root nodule symbioses ===
==== Legume family ====
Plants that contribute to nitrogen fixation include those of the legume family—Fabaceae— with taxa such as kudzu, clover, soybean, alfalfa, lupin, peanut and rooibos. They contain symbiotic rhizobia bacteria within nodules in their root systems, producing nitrogen compounds that help the plant to grow and compete with other plants. When the plant dies, the fixed nitrogen is released, making it available to other plants; this helps to fertilize the soil. The great majority of legumes have this association, but a few genera (e.g., Styphnolobium) do not. In many traditional farming practices, fields are rotated through various types of crops, which usually include one consisting mainly or entirely of clover.
Fixation efficiency in soil is dependent on many factors, including the legume and air and soil conditions. For example, nitrogen fixation by red clover can range from 50 to 200 lb/acre (56 to 224 kg/ha).
==== Non-leguminous ====
The ability to fix nitrogen in nodules is present in actinorhizal plants such as alder and bayberry, with the help of Frankia bacteria. They are found in 25 genera in the orders Cucurbitales, Fagales and Rosales, which together with the Fabales form a nitrogen-fixing clade of eurosids. The ability to fix nitrogen is not universally present in these families. For example, of 122 Rosaceae genera, only four fix nitrogen. Fabales were the first lineage to branch off this nitrogen-fixing clade; thus, the ability to fix nitrogen may be plesiomorphic and subsequently lost in most descendants of the original nitrogen-fixing plant; however, it may be that the basic genetic and physiological requirements were present in an incipient state in the most recent common ancestors of all these plants, but only evolved to full function in some of them.
In addition, Trema (Parasponia), a tropical genus in the family Cannabaceae, is unusually able to interact with rhizobia and form nitrogen-fixing nodules.
=== Other plant symbionts ===
Some other plants live in association with a cyanobiont (cyanobacteria such as Nostoc) which fix nitrogen for them:
Some lichens such as Lobaria and Peltigera
Mosquito fern (Azolla species)
Cycads
Gunnera
Blasia (liverwort)
Hornworts
Some symbiotic relationships involving agriculturally-important plants are:
Sugarcane and unclear endophytes
Foxtail millet and Azospirillum brasilense
Kallar grass and Azoarcus sp. strain BH72
Rice and Herbaspirillum seropedicae
Wheat and Klebsiella pneumoniae
Maize landrace 'Sierra Mixe' / 'olotón' and various Bacteroidota and Pseudomonadota
== Industrial processes ==
=== Historical ===
A method for nitrogen fixation was first described by Henry Cavendish in 1784 using electric arcs reacting nitrogen and oxygen in air. This method was implemented in the Birkeland–Eyde process of 1903. The fixation of nitrogen by lightning is a very similar natural occurring process.
The possibility that atmospheric nitrogen reacts with certain chemicals was first observed by M. Desfosses, a pharmacist from Besançon, in 1828. He observed that mixtures of alkali metal oxides and carbon react with nitrogen at high temperatures. With the use of barium carbonate as starting material, the first commercial process became available in the 1860s, developed by Margueritte and Sourdeval. The resulting barium cyanide reacts with steam, yielding ammonia. In 1898 Frank and Caro developed what is known as the Frank–Caro process to fix nitrogen in the form of calcium cyanamide. The process was eclipsed by the Haber process, which was discovered in 1909.
=== Haber process ===
The dominant industrial method for producing ammonia is the Haber process, also known as the Haber-Bosch process. It was developed by German chemists Fritz Haber and Carl Bosch and first demonstrated in 1909. Fertilizer production is now the largest source of human-produced fixed nitrogen in the terrestrial ecosystem. Ammonia is a required precursor to fertilizers, explosives, and other products. The Haber process requires high pressures (around 200 atm) and high temperatures (at least 400 °C), which are routine conditions for industrial catalysis. This process uses natural gas as a hydrogen source and air as a nitrogen source. The ammonia product has resulted in an intensification of nitrogen fertilizer globally and is credited with supporting the expansion of the human population from around 2 billion in the early 20th century to more than 8 billion people now.
=== Homogeneous catalysis ===
Much research has been conducted on the discovery of catalysts for nitrogen fixation, often with the goal of lowering energy requirements. However, such research has thus far failed to approach the efficiency and ease of the Haber process. Many compounds react with atmospheric nitrogen to give dinitrogen complexes. The first dinitrogen complex to be reported was Ru(NH3)5(N2)2+. Some soluble complexes do catalyze nitrogen fixation.
== Lightning ==
Nitrogen can be fixed by lightning converting nitrogen gas (N2) and oxygen gas (O2) in the atmosphere into nitrogen oxides (NOx). The N2 molecule is highly stable and nonreactive due to the triple bond between the nitrogen atoms. Lightning produces enough energy and heat to break this bond allowing nitrogen atoms to react with oxygen, forming NOx. These compounds cannot be used by plants, but as this molecule cools, it reacts with oxygen to form nitrogen dioxide (NO2), which in turn reacts with water to produce nitrous acid (HNO2) or nitric acid (HNO3). When these acids seep into the soil, they produce nitrate (NO3−), which is of use to plants.
== See also ==
Birkeland–Eyde process: an industrial fertilizer production process
Carbon fixation
Denitrification: an organic process of nitrogen release
George Washington Carver: an American botanist
Heterocyst
Marine nitrogen fixation
Nitrification: biological production of nitrogen
Nitrogen cycle: the flow and transformation of nitrogen through the environment
Nitrogen deficiency
Nitrogen fixation package for quantitative measurement of nitrogen fixation by plants
Nitrogenase: enzymes used by organisms to fix nitrogen
Ostwald process: a chemical process for making nitric acid (HNO3)
Electrification of catalytic processes: electrochemical reduction of N2
== References ==
== External links ==
Hirsch AM (2009). "A Brief History of the Discovery of Nitrogen-fixing Organisms" (PDF). University of California, Los Angeles. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 July 2010. Retrieved 14 April 2012.
"Marine Nitrogen Fixation laboratory". University of Southern California.
"Travis P. Hignett Collection of Fixed Nitrogen Research Laboratory Photographs // Science History Institute Digital Collections". digital.sciencehistory.org. Retrieved 16 August 2019. Science History Institute Digital Collections (Photographs depicting numerous stages of the nitrogen fixation process and the various equipment and apparatus used in the production of atmospheric nitrogen, including generators, compressors, filters, thermostats, and vacuum and blast furnaces).
"Proposed Process for the Fixation of Atmospheric Nitrogen", historical perspective, Scientific American, 13 July 1878, p. 21
A global ocean snapshot of nitrogen fixers by matching sequences to cells in the Tara Ocean

Rice is a cereal grain and, in its domesticated form, is the staple food of over half of the world's population, particularly in Africa and Asia. Rice is the seed of the grass species Oryza sativa (Asian rice)—or, less commonly, Oryza glaberrima (African rice). Asian rice was domesticated in China some 13,500 to 8,200 years ago; African rice was domesticated independently in West Africa about 3,000 years ago. Rice has become commonplace in many cultures worldwide; in 2023, 800 million tons were produced, placing it third after sugarcane and maize. Only some 8% of rice is traded internationally. China, India, and Indonesia are the largest consumers of rice. A substantial amount of the rice produced in developing nations is lost after harvest through factors such as poor transport and storage. Rice yields can be reduced by pests including insects, rodents, and birds, as well as by weeds, and by diseases such as rice blast. Traditional rice polycultures such as rice-duck farming, and modern integrated pest management seek to control damage from pests in a sustainable way.
Dry rice grain is milled to remove the outer layers; depending on how much is removed, products range from brown rice to rice with germ and white rice. Some is parboiled to make it easy to cook. Rice contains no gluten; it provides protein but not all the essential amino acids needed for good health. Rice of different types is eaten around the world. The composition of starch components within the grain, amylose and amylopectin, gives it different texture properties. Long-grain rice, from the Indica cultivar, tends to stay intact on cooking, and is dry and fluffy. The aromatic rice varieties, such as basmati and jasmine, are widely used in Asian cooking, and distinguished by their bold and nutty flavor profile. Medium-grain rice, from either the Japonica or Indica cultivar, or a hybrid of both, is moist and tender and tends to stick together. Its varieties include Calrose, which founded the Californian rice industry, Carnaroli, attributed as the king of Italian rice due to its excellent cooking properties, and black rice, which looks dark purple due to high levels of anthocyanins, and is also known as forbidden rice as it was reserved for the consumption of the royal family in ancient China. Short-grain rice, primarily from the Japonica cultivar, has an oval appearance and sticky texture. It is featured heavily in Japanese cooking such as sushi (with rice such as Koshihikari, Hatsushimo, and Sasanishiki, unique to different regions of climate and geography in Japan), as it keeps its shape when cooked. It is also used for sweet dishes such as mochi (with glutinous rice), and in European cuisine such as risotto (with arborio rice) and paella (with bomba rice, which is actually an Indica variety). Cooked white rice contains 29% carbohydrate and 2% protein, with some manganese. Golden rice is a variety produced by genetic engineering to contain vitamin A.
Production of rice is estimated to have caused over 1% of global greenhouse gas emissions in 2022. Predictions of how rice yields will be affected by climate change vary across geographies and socioeconomic contexts. In human culture, rice plays a role in various religions and traditions, such as in weddings.
== Description ==
The rice plant can grow to over 1 m (3 ft) tall; if in deep water, it can reach a length of 5 m (16 ft). From seed to harvest, it takes about six months. A single plant may have several leafy stems or tillers. The upright stem is jointed with nodes along its length; a long slender leaf arises from each node. The self-fertile flowers are produced in a panicle, a branched inflorescence which arises from the last internode on the stem. There can be up to 350 spikelets in a panicle, each containing male and female flower parts (anthers and ovule). A fertilised ovule develops into the edible grain or caryopsis.
Rice is a cereal belonging to the family Poaceae. As a tropical crop, it can be grown during the two distinct seasons (dry and wet) of the year provided that sufficient water is made available. It is normally an annual, but in the tropics it can survive as a perennial, producing a ratoon crop.
== Agronomy ==
=== Growing ===
Like all crops, rice depends for its growth on both biotic and abiotic environmental factors. The principal biotic factors are crop variety, pests, and plant diseases. Abiotic factors include the soil type, whether lowland or upland, amount of rain or irrigation water, temperature, day length, and intensity of sunlight.
Rice grains can be planted directly into the field where they will grow, or seedlings can be grown in a seedbed and transplanted into the field. Direct seeding needs some 60 to 80 kg of grain per hectare, while transplanting needs less, around 40 kg per hectare, but requires far more labour. Most rice in Asia is transplanted by hand. Mechanical transplanting takes less time but requires a carefully prepared field and seedlings raised on mats or in trays to fit the machine. Rice does not thrive if continuously submerged. Rice can be grown in different environments, depending upon water availability. The usual arrangement is for lowland fields to be surrounded by bunds and flooded to a depth of a few centimetres until around a week before harvest time; this requires a large amount of water. The "alternate wetting and drying" technique uses less water. One form of this is to flood the field to a depth of 5 cm (2 in), then to let the water level drop to 15 cm (6 in) below surface level, as measured by looking into a perforated field water tube sunk into the soil, and then repeating the cycle. Deepwater rice varieties tolerate flooding to a depth of over 50 centimetres for at least a month. Upland rice is grown without flooding, in hilly or mountainous regions; it is rainfed like wheat or maize.
=== Harvesting ===
Across Asia, unmilled rice or "paddy" (Malay padi), was traditionally the product of smallholder agriculture, with manual harvesting. Larger farms make use of machines such as combine harvesters to reduce the input of labour. The grain is ready to harvest when the moisture content is 20–25%. Harvesting involves reaping, stacking the cut stalks, threshing to separate the grain, and cleaning by winnowing or screening. The rice grain is dried as soon as possible to bring the moisture content down to a level that is safe from mould fungi. Traditional drying relies on the heat of the sun, with the grain spread out on mats or on pavements.
== Evolution ==
=== Phylogeny ===
The edible rice species are members of the BOP clade within the grass family, the Poaceae. The rice subfamily, Oryzoideae, is sister to the bamboos, Bambusoideae, and the cereal subfamily Pooideae. The rice genus Oryza is one of eleven in the Oryzeae; it is sister to the Phyllorachideae. The edible rice species O. sativa and O. glaberrima are among some 300 species or subspecies in the genus.
=== History ===
Oryza sativa rice was first domesticated in China 9,000 years ago, by people of Neolithic cultures in the Upper and Lower Yangtze, associated with Hmong–Mien speakers and pre-Austronesians, respectively. The functional allele for nonshattering, the critical indicator of domestication in grains, as well as five other single-nucleotide polymorphisms, is identical in both indica and japonica. This implies a single domestication event for O. sativa. Both indica and japonica forms of Asian rice sprang from a single domestication event in China from the wild rice Oryza rufipogon. Despite this evidence, it appears that indica rice arose when japonica arrived in India about 4,500 years ago and hybridised with another rice, whether an undomesticated proto-indica or wild O. nivara.
Rice was introduced early into Sino-Tibetan cultures in northern China by around 6000 to 5600 years ago, and to the Korean peninsula and Japan by around 5500 to 3200 years ago. It was also carried into Taiwan by the Dapenkeng culture by 5500 to 4000 years ago, before spreading southwards via the Austronesian migrations to Island Southeast Asia, Madagascar, and Guam, but did not survive the voyage to the rest of the Pacific. It reached Austroasiatic and Kra-Dai speakers in Mainland Southeast Asia and southern China by 5000 years ago.
Rice spread around the rest of the world through cultivation, migration and trade, eventually to the Americas as part of the Columbian exchange after 1492. The now less common Oryza glaberrima (African rice) was independently domesticated in Africa around 3,000 years ago, and introduced to the Americas by the Spanish. In British North America by the time of the start of the American War of Independence, rice had become the fourth most valuable export commodity behind only tobacco, wheat, and fish.
== Commerce ==
=== Production ===
In 2023, world production of rice was 800 million tonnes, led by China and India with a combined 52% of the total. This placed rice third in the list of crops by production, after sugarcane and maize. Other major producers were Bangladesh, Indonesia and Vietnam. 90% of world production is from Asia.
=== Yield records ===
The average world yield for rice was 4.7 metric tons per hectare (2.1 short tons per acre), in 2022. Yuan Longping of China's National Hybrid Rice Research and Development Center set a world record for rice yield in 1999 at 17.1 metric tons per hectare (7.6 short tons per acre) on a demonstration plot. This employed specially developed hybrid rice and the System of Rice Intensification (SRI), an innovation in rice farming.
=== Food security ===
Rice is a major food staple in Asia, Latin America, and some parts of Africa, feeding over half the world's population. However, a substantial part of the crop can be lost post-harvest through inefficient transportation, storage, and milling. A quarter of the crop in Nigeria is lost after harvest. Storage losses include damage by mould fungi if the rice is not dried sufficiently. In China, losses in modern metal silos were just 0.2%, compared to 7–13% when rice was stored by rural households.
=== Processing ===
The dry grain is milled to remove the outer layers, namely the husk and bran. These can be removed in a single step, in two steps, or as in commercial milling in a multi-step process of cleaning, dehusking, separation, polishing, grading, and weighing. Brown rice only has the inedible husk removed. Further milling removes bran and the germ to create successively whiter products. Parboiled rice is subjected to a steaming process before it is milled. This makes the grain harder, and moves some of the grain's vitamins and minerals into the white part of the rice so these are retained after milling.
=== Trade ===
World trade figures are much smaller than those for production, as less than 8% of rice produced is traded internationally. China, an exporter of rice in the early 2000s, had become the world's largest importer of rice by 2013. Developing countries are the main players in the world rice trade; by 2012, India was the largest exporter of rice, with Thailand and Vietnam the other largest exporters.
=== Worldwide consumption ===
As of 2016, the countries that consumed the most rice were China (29% of total), India, and Indonesia. By 2020, Bangladesh had taken third place from Indonesia. On an annual average from 2020 to 2023, China consumed 154 million tonnes of rice, India consumed 109 million tonnes, and Bangladesh and Indonesia consumed about 36 million tonnes each. Across the world, rice consumption per capita fell in the 21st century as people in Asia and elsewhere ate less grain and more meat. An exception is Sub-Saharan Africa, where both per capita consumption of rice and population are increasing.
== Food ==
=== Eating qualities ===
Rice is a commonly-eaten food around the world. The varieties of rice are typically classified as short-, medium-, and long-grained. Oryza sativa indica varieties are usually long-grained; Oryza sativa japonica varieties are usually short- or medium-grained. Short-grain rice, with the exception of Spanish Bomba, is usually sticky when cooked, and is suitable for puddings. Thai Jasmine rice is aromatic, and unusually for a long-grain rice has some stickiness, with a soft texture. Indian Basmati rice is very long-grained and aromatic. Italian Arborio rice, used for risotto, is of medium length, oval, and quite sticky. Japanese sushi rice is a sticky short-grain variety.
=== Nutrition ===
Cooked white rice is 69% water, 29% carbohydrates, 2% protein, and contains negligible fat (table). In a reference serving of 100 grams (3.5 oz), cooked white rice provides 130 calories of food energy, and contains moderate levels of manganese (18% DV), with no other micronutrients in significant content (all less than 10% of the Daily Value).
In 2018, the World Health Organization strongly recommended fortifying rice with iron, and conditionally recommended fortifying it with vitamin A and with folic acid.
Rice does not contain gluten, so is suitable for people on a gluten-free diet. Rice is a good source of protein and a staple food in many parts of the world, but it is not a complete protein as it does not contain all of the essential amino acids in sufficient amounts for good health.
=== Golden rice ===
Golden rice is a variety produced through genetic engineering to synthesize beta-carotene, a precursor of vitamin A, in the endosperm of the rice grain. It is intended to be grown and eaten in parts of the world where Vitamin A deficiency is prevalent. Golden rice has been opposed by anti-GMO activists, such as in the Philippines. In 2016 more than 100 Nobel laureates encouraged the use of genetically modified organisms, such as golden rice, for the benefits these could bring.
== Rice and climate change ==
=== Greenhouse gases from rice production ===
In 2022, greenhouse gas emissions from rice cultivation were estimated at 5.7 billion tonnes CO2eq, representing 1.2% of total emissions. Within the agriculture sector, rice produces almost half the greenhouse gas emissions from croplands, some 30% of agricultural methane emissions, and 11% of agricultural nitrous oxide emissions. Methane is released from rice fields subject to long-term flooding, as this inhibits the soil from absorbing atmospheric oxygen, resulting in anaerobic fermentation of organic matter in the soil. Emissions can be limited by planting new varieties, not flooding continuously, and removing straw.
It is possible to cut methane emissions in rice cultivation by improved water management, combining dry seeding and one drawdown, or executing a sequence of wetting and drying. This results in emission reductions of up to 90% compared to full flooding and even increased yields.
=== Effects of climate change on rice production ===
Predictions of climate change's effects on rice cultivation vary. Global rice yield has been projected to decrease by around 3.2% with each 1°C increase in global average temperature while another study predicts global rice cultivation will increase initially, plateauing at about 3°C warming (2091–2100 relative to 1850–1900).
The impacts of climate change on rice cultivation vary across geographic location and socioeconomic context. For example, rising temperatures and decreasing solar radiation during the later years of the 20th century decreased rice yield by between 10% and 20% across 200 farms in seven Asian countries. This may have been caused by increased night-time respiration. IRRI has predicted that Asian rice yields will fall by some 20% per 1°C rise in global mean temperature. Further, rice is unable to yield grain if the flowers experience a temperature of 35°C or more for over one hour, so the crop would be lost under these conditions.
In the Po Valley in Italy, the arborio and carnaroli risotto rice varieties have suffered poor harvests through drought in the 21st century. The Ente Nazionale Risi is developing drought-resistant varieties; its nuovo prometeo variety has deep roots that enable it to tolerate drought, but is not suitable for risotto.
== Pests, weeds, and diseases ==
=== Pests and weeds ===
Rice yield can be reduced by weed growth, and a wide variety of pests including insects, nematodes, and rodents such as rats, snails, and birds. Major rice insect pests include armyworms, rice bugs, black bugs, stem-borers, cutworms, planthoppers, leafhoppers, mealybugs, crickets, and grasshoppers. Resurgence of brown planthopper populations may be caused by over-use of broad-spectrum insecticides, and high rates of nitrogen fertiliser application may worsen outbreaks: as with aphids.
Weather conditions can contribute to pest outbreaks: rice gall midge outbreaks are worsened by high rainfall in the wet season, while thrips outbreaks are associated with drought.
=== Diseases ===
Rice blast, caused by the fungus Magnaporthe grisea, is the most serious disease of growing rice.
It and bacterial leaf streak (caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae) are perennially the two worst rice diseases worldwide; they are both among the ten most important diseases of all crop plants. Other major rice diseases include sheath blight (caused by Rhizoctonia solani), false smut (Ustilaginoidea virens), and bacterial panicle blight (Burkholderia glumae). Viral diseases include rice bunchy stunt, rice dwarf, rice tungro, and rice yellow mottle.
Rice plants resist disease by mounting a defence with reactive oxygen species molecules at the site where pathogens are entering. The defence is launched when a pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) is detected, triggering a natural immune response (both PAMP-triggered immunity and effector-triggered immunity). Such immunity requires the gene Os-NADP-ME2. Rice blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae uses its avirulence effector AVR-Pii to inhibit the rice plant's NADP-malic enzyme. The effect is to suppress the plant's ability to create reactive oxygen species, which means that its innate immunity fails.
=== Pest management ===
Crop protection scientists are developing sustainable techniques for managing rice pests. Sustainable pest management is based on four principles: biodiversity, host plant resistance, landscape ecology, and hierarchies in a landscape—from biological to social. Farmers' pesticide applications are often unnecessary, and pesticides may actually induce resurgence of populations of rice pests such as the brown planthopper, both by destroying beneficial insects and by enhancing the pest's reproduction. The International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) demonstrated in 1993 that an 87.5% reduction in pesticide use can lead to an overall drop in pest numbers.
Farmers in China, Indonesia and the Philippines have traditionally managed weeds and pests by the polycultural practice of raising ducks and sometimes fish in their rice paddies. These produce valuable additional crops, eat small pest animals, manure the rice, and in the case of ducks also control weeds.
Rice plants produce their own chemical defences to protect themselves from pest attacks. Some synthetic chemicals, such as the herbicide 2,4-D, cause the plant to increase the production of certain defensive chemicals and thereby increase the plant's resistance to some types of pests. Conversely, other chemicals, such as the insecticide imidacloprid, appear to induce changes in the gene expression of the rice that make the plant more susceptible to certain pests.
Plant breeders have created rice cultivars incorporating resistance to various insect pests. Conventional plant breeding of resistant varieties has been limited by challenges such as rearing insect pests for testing, and the great diversity and continuous evolution of pests. Resistance genes are being sought from wild species of rice, and genetic engineering techniques are being applied.
== Ecotypes and cultivars ==
The International Rice Research Institute maintains the International Rice Genebank, which holds over 100,000 rice varieties.
Much of southeast Asia grows sticky or glutinous rice varieties. High-yield cultivars of rice suitable for cultivation in Africa, called the New Rice for Africa (NERICA), have been developed to improve food security and alleviate poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Rice cultivars also fall into groups according to environmental conditions, season of planting, and season of harvest, called ecotypes. Some major groups are the Japan-type (grown in Japan), "bulu" and "tjereh" types (Indonesia); "aman" (main winter crop), "aus" ("aush", summer), and "boro" (spring) (Bengal and Assam). Cultivars exist that are adapted to deep flooding, and these are generally called "floating rice".
The complete genome of rice was sequenced in 2005, making it the first crop plant to reach this status.
Since then, the genomes of hundreds of types of rice, both wild and cultivated, and including both Asian and African rice species, have been sequenced.
== Biotechnology ==
=== High-yielding varieties ===
The high-yielding varieties are a group of crops created during the Green Revolution to increase global food production radically. The first Green Revolution rice variety, IR8, was produced in 1966 at the International Rice Research Institute through a cross between an Indonesian variety named "Peta" and a Chinese variety named "Dee Geo Woo Gen". Green Revolution varieties were bred to have short strong stems so that the rice would not lodge or fall over. This enabled them to stay upright and productive even with heavy applications of fertiliser.
C4 rice is a proposed rice that uses C4 carbon fixation to improve the efficiency of photosynthesis and hence crop yield. The C4 Rice Consortium launched in 2006. It has explored the use of five maize genes to allow rice to create malic acid from carbon dioxide. If successful this might also increase the crop's efficiency of water use. Work has continued until 2026 on prototyping changes both to metabolism and to leaf anatomy.
=== Expression of human proteins ===
Ventria Bioscience has genetically modified rice to express lactoferrin and lysozyme which are proteins usually found in breast milk, and human serum albumin. These proteins have antiviral, antibacterial, and antifungal effects. Rice containing these added proteins can be used as a component in oral rehydration solutions to treat diarrheal diseases, thereby shortening their duration and reducing recurrence. Such supplements may also help reverse anaemia.
=== Flood-tolerance ===
In areas subject to flooding, farmers have long planted flood-tolerant varieties known as deepwater rice. In South and South East Asia, flooding affects some 20 million hectares (49 million acres) each year.
Flooding has historically led to massive losses in yields, such as in the Philippines, where in 2006, rice crops worth $65 million were lost to flooding.
Standard rice varieties cannot withstand stagnant flooding for more than about a week, since it disallows the plant access to necessary requirements such as sunlight and gas exchange. The Swarna Sub1 cultivar can tolerate week-long submergence, consuming carbohydrates efficiently and continuing to grow. So-called "scuba rice" with the Sub1A transgene is robustly tolerant of submergence for as long as two weeks, offering much improved flood survival for farmers' crops. IRRI has created Sub1A varieties and distributed them to Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Nepal, and the Philippines.
=== Drought-tolerance ===
Drought represents a significant environmental stress for rice production, with 19–23 million hectares (47–57 million acres) of rainfed rice production in South and South East Asia often at risk. Under drought conditions, without sufficient water to afford them the ability to obtain the required levels of nutrients from the soil, conventional commercial rice varieties can be severely affected—as happened for example in India early in the 21st century.
The International Rice Research Institute conducts research into developing drought-tolerant rice varieties, including the varieties Sahbhagi Dhan, Sahod Ulan, and Sookha dhan, currently being employed by farmers in India, the Philippines, and Nepal respectively. In addition, in 2013 the Japanese National Institute for Agrobiological Sciences led a team which successfully inserted the DEEPER ROOTING 1 (DRO1) gene, from the Philippine upland rice variety Kinandang Patong, into the popular commercial rice variety IR64, giving rise to a far deeper root system in the resulting plants. This facilitates an improved ability for the rice plant to derive its required nutrients in times of drought via accessing deeper layers of soil, a feature demonstrated by trials which saw the IR64 + DRO1 rice yields drop by 10% under moderate drought conditions, compared to 60% for the unmodified IR64 variety.
=== Salt-tolerance ===
Soil salinity poses a major threat to rice crop productivity, particularly along low-lying coastal areas during the dry season. For example, roughly 1 million hectares (2.5 million acres) of the coastal areas of Bangladesh are affected by saline soils. These high concentrations of salt can severely affect rice plants' physiology, especially during early stages of growth, and as such farmers are often forced to abandon these areas.
Progress has been made in developing rice varieties capable of tolerating such conditions; the hybrid created from the cross between the commercial rice variety IR56 and the wild rice species Oryza coarctata is one example. O. coarctata can grow in soils with double the limit of salinity of normal varieties, but does not produce edible rice. Developed by the International Rice Research Institute, the hybrid variety utilises specialised leaf glands that remove salt into the atmosphere. It was produced from one successful embryo out of 34,000 crosses between the two species; this was then backcrossed to IR56 with the aim of preserving the genes responsible for salt tolerance that were inherited from O. coarctata.
=== Cold tolerance ===
Rice is sensitive to temperatures below 12°C. Sowing takes place once the daily average temperature is reliably above this limit. Average temperatures below that reduce growth; if sustained for over four days, germination and seedling growth are harmed and seedlings may die. In larger plants subjected to cold, rice blast is encouraged, seriously reducing yield. As of 2022, researchers continue to study the mechanisms of chilling tolerance in rice and its genetic basis. Cold-tolerant varieties including risotto rice and basmati rice have been trialled successfully on peaty soil in England in 2025. If, as is probable, global warming raises the temperature by 2°C or more, rice could be grown across the country.
=== Reducing methane emissions ===
Producing rice in paddies is harmful for the environment due to the release of methane by methanogenic bacteria. These bacteria live in the anaerobic waterlogged soil, consuming nutrients released by rice roots. Putting the barley gene SUSIBA2 into rice creates a shift in biomass production from root to shoot, decreasing the methanogen population, and resulting in a reduction of methane emissions of up to 97%. Further, the modification increases the amount of rice grains.
=== Model organism ===
Rice is used as a model organism for investigating the mechanisms of meiosis and DNA repair in higher plants. For example, study using rice has shown that the gene OsRAD51C is necessary for the accurate repair of DNA double-strand breaks during meiosis.
== In human culture ==
Rice plays an important role in certain religions and popular beliefs. In Hindu wedding ceremonies, rice, denoting fertility, prosperity, and purity, is thrown into a fire, a custom modified in Western weddings, where people throw rice over the wedded couple. In Malay weddings, rice features in multiple special wedding foods such as sweet glutinous rice. In Japan and the Philippines, rice wine is used for weddings and other celebrations. Dewi Sri is a goddess of the Indo-Malaysian archipelago, who in myth is transformed into rice or other crops. The start of the rice planting season is marked in Asian countries including Nepal and Cambodia with a Royal Ploughing Ceremony.
== See also ==
Artificial rice
Direct seeded rice
List of rice dishes
Rice Belt
== References ==
== Further reading ==
Liu, Wende; Liu, Jinling; Triplett, Lindsay; Leach, Jan E.; Wang, Guo-Liang (August 4, 2014). "Novel insights into rice innate immunity against bacterial and fungal pathogens". Annual Review of Phytopathology. 52 (1). Annual Reviews: 213–241. Bibcode:2014AnRvP..52..213L. doi:10.1146/annurev-phyto-102313-045926. PMID 24906128.
Deb, D. (October 2019). "Restoring Rice Biodiversity". Scientific American. 321 (4): 54–61. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1019-54. PMID 39010400. India originally possessed some 110,000 landraces of rice with diverse and valuable properties. These include enrichment in vital nutrients and the ability to withstand flood, drought, salinity or pest infestations. The Green Revolution covered fields with a few high-yielding varieties, so that roughly 90 percent of the landraces vanished from farmers' collections. High-yielding varieties require expensive inputs. They perform abysmally on marginal farms or in adverse environmental conditions, forcing poor farmers into debt.
Singh, B. N. (2018). Global Rice Cultivation & Cultivars. New Delhi: Studium Press. ISBN 978-1-62699-107-1. Archived from the original on March 14, 2018. Retrieved March 14, 2018.

FIUE HUNDRED POINTES
GOOD HUSBANDRIE.
THOMAS TUSSER.
THE EDITION OF 1580 COLLATED WITH THOSE OF 1573 AND 1577.
TOGETHER WITH A REPRINT, FROM THE UNIQUE COPY IN THE BRITISH
MUSEUM, OF "A HUNDRETH GOOD POINTES OF HUSBANDRIE," 1557.
EDITED (WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES, AND GLOSSARY) BY
W. PAYNE, ESQ., AND SIDNEY J. HERRTAGE, ESQ., B.A.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED FOR THE ENGLISH DIALECT SOCIETY
BY TRÜBNER & CO., 57 AND 59, LUDGATE HILL.
1878.
PREFACE.
While for all who take an interest in the customs and life of our
ancestors Tusser's writings must always possess considerable interest,
to the Members of the English Dialect Society they are especially
valuable for the large number of dialectic words and forms which they
contain. The Glossary has therefore been made very full, possibly,
in the opinion of some, too full; but as this is the most important
portion of the work to the Society, I have thought it better to err, if
at all, on the right side.
With regard to the preparation of this Edition a few words may be
necessary. As the Members of the Society are aware, the task was
originally undertaken by Mr. W. Payne. Ill-health unfortunately
prevented him from carrying the work to a completion, but to him the
Society is indebted for the supervision of the reprint of the Edition
of 1580, which he collated most carefully with the editions of 1557 and
1577, and to which he added several pieces from those editions, thus
making the present reprint more complete than any yet published. Mr.
Payne also compiled a very complete Index of Words, which has been of
great assistance to me for purposes of reference, and in preparing the
Glossary. The notes also from Tusser Redivivus (marked T.R.) were for
the most part extracted by Mr. Payne.
A reprint of the First Edition of 1557 was not included in the original
programme, but after the work came into my hands an opportunity was
presented through the kindness of Mr. F. J. Furnivall, who lent for the
purpose his copy of the reprint of 1810, of exhibiting the work in its
original form of "One hundreth Points" side by side with the extended
edition of 1580, the last which had the benefit of the author's
supervision. The proof-sheets have been collated with the unique copy
in the British Museum by Miss Toulmin-Smith, to whom I return my thanks
for her kindness, and the correctness of the reprint may consequently
be relied on. From Mr. F. J. Furnivall I have received numerous hints,
and much valuable help, while to Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S., I am indebted
for his kindness in revising and supplementing the notes on the Plants
named in Tusser. But my chief obligations are due to the Rev. W. W.
Skeat, whose uniform kindness has considerably lightened my labours,
and from whom both directly and indirectly (through the notes in his
numerous publications), but more particularly in his noble edition of
Piers Plowman, I have derived the greatest assistance.
S. J. H.
May 14th, 1878.
[Transcriber's note: The original print edition has both page footnotes
and an end section of 'Notes and Illustrations.' In this digital edition,
the page footnotes are grouped at the end of each chapter and renumbered
accordingly: [1], [[2], etc. References to the endnotes are numbered [E1],
[E2], etc. The html version also links words in the main text to their
reference points in the Glossary.
The 'Erratum' on p. xxxii of the print edition has been silently corrected
within the text, and the 'Additional Notes' on p. 317 are now incorporated
within the preceding 'Notes and Illustrations.']
CONTENTS.
PAGE
PREFACE v
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF THE AUTHOR xi
TUSSER'S WILL xxix
Fiue hundred pointes of good husbandrie 1
A lesson how to confer euery abstract with his month, &c. 2
A Table of the Pointes of Husbandrie 3
1. Epistle to Lord W. Paget 5
2. Epistle to Lord T. Paget 7
3. To the Reader 11
4. Introduction to the Booke of Husbandrie 13
5. Preface to the Buier of this Booke 14
6. The Commodities of Husbandrie 15
7. A Riddle 15
8. The Description of Husbandrie 16
9. The Ladder to thrift 17
10. Good husbandlie lessons 18
11. An habitation inforced better late than neuer 27
12. The fermers dailie diet 27
13. Description of the properties of windes at all seasons 29
14. Of the Planets 30
15. Septembers Abstract 31
16. Septembers husbandrie 34
17. A digression to husbandlie furniture 35
18. Octobers abstract 43
19. Octobers husbandrie 47
20. Nouembers abstract 53
21. Nouembers husbandrie 55
22. Decembers abstract 59
23. Decembers husbandrie 61
24. A digression to hospitalitie 65
25. Description of time and the yeare 65
26. Description of life and riches 66
27. Description of housekeeping 67
28. Description of Christmas 67
29. Description of apt time to spend 68
30. Against fantasticall scruplenes 69
31. Christmas husbandlie fare 69
32. A Christmas Caroll 70
33. Januaries abstract 72
34. Of trees or fruites to be set or remooued 76
35. Januaries husbandrie 76
36. Februaries abstract 85
37. Februaries husbandrie 87
38. Marches abstract 91
39. Seedes and herbes for the Kitchen 93
40. Herbes and rootes for sallets and sauce 94
41. Herbes and rootes to boile or to butter 95
42. Strowing herbes of all sortes 95
43. Herbes, branches, and flowers, for windowes and pots 95
44. Herbes to still in Sommer 96
45. Herbes for Physick, etc. 97
46. Marches husbandrie 97
47. Aprils abstract 102
48. Aprils husbandrie 103
49. A lesson for dairie maid Cisley 107
50. Maies abstract 109
51. Maies husbandrie 111
52. Junes abstract 116
53. Junes husbandrie 117
54. Julies abstract 121
55. Julies husbandrie 122
56. Augusts abstract 124
57. Augusts husbandrie 128
58. Corne Haruest equally deuided into ten partes 136
59. A briefe conclusion, each word beginning with the letter T 137
60. Mans age deuided into twelue seauens 138
61. Another diuision of mans age 138
62. Comparison between good and bad husband 139
63. Comparison betweene Champion countrie and seuerall 140
64. Description of an enuious neighbour 146
64.* To light a candell before the Deuill 148
65. A sonet against a slanderous tongue 150
66. Sonet upon the Authors first seuen yeeres seruice 151
67. Dialogue on wiuing and thriuing 152
68. The Authors Epistle to the Ladie Paget 159
69. The Authors Epistle to the Reader 161
70. The Author's Preface to his booke of Huswiferie 162
71. The praise of Huswiferie 163
72. A description of Huswife and Huswiferie 163
73. Instructions to Huswiferie 163
74. A digression to cockcrowing 165
75. Huswiferie morning workes 167
76. Huswifelie breakefast workes 168
77. Huswifelie admonitions or lessons 168
78. Brewing 170
79. Baking 171
80. Cookerie 171
81. Dairie 172
82. Scouring 172
83. Washing 173
84. Malting 173
85. Dinner time huswiferie 174
86. Huswifelie afternoone workes 175
87. Huswifelie euening workes 177
88. Supper time huswiferie 178
89. After Supper workes of huswiferie 179
90. The ploughmans feasting daies 180
91. The good huswifelie Physicke 182
92. The good motherlie nurserie 183
93. A precept of thinking on the poore 183
94. A comparison betweene good huswiferie and euill 184
95. The meanes for children to attaine to learning 185
96. A description of womans age 187
97. The Inholders posie 187
98. Certain Table Lessons 188
99. Lessons for waiting seruants 189
100. Husbandly posies for the hall 190
101. Posies for the parler 190
102. Posies for the gests chamber 191
103. Posies for thine owne bed chamber 192
104. A Sonet to the Ladie Paget 193
105. Principall points of Religion 193
106. The Authors beleefe 194
107. Of the omnipotencie of God and debilitie of man 199
108. Of Almes deedes 200
109. Of malus homo 201
110. Of two sortes of people 201
111. Of what force the deuill is if he be resisted 201
112. Eight of Saint Barnards verses in Latine and English 202
113. Of the Authors departing from the Court 204
114. The Authors life of his own penning 205
115. Of Fortune 216
A hundreth good pointes of husbandrie 219
Epistle to Lord Paget (1557) 220
_Concordia parvæ res crescunt_ 221
Augusts husbandrie 222
Septembers husbandrie 223
Octobers husbandrie 223
Nouembers husbandrie 224
Decembers husbandrie 225
On Christmas 225
Januaries husbandrie 226
Februarys husbandrie 228
Marches husbandrie 229
A digression to huswifrie 229
Aprils husbandrie 229
Mays husbandrie 230
Junes husbandrie 231
Julys husbandrie 232
NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS 235
GLOSSARY 319
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF THE AUTHOR.
Thomas Tusser, the Author of the "Five Hundred Points of Good
Husbandry," was born at Rivenhall,[1] near Kelvedon and Witham, in
the County of Essex, about the year 1525. The exact date of his birth
is uncertain, Warton[2] placing it in 1523, and Dr. Mavor in 1515, in
which he is supported by the inscription on the mural tablet erected to
the memory of Tusser in the church of Manningtree, where he is stated
to have been sixty-five years of age at the time of his death, which
took place in 1580.
Tusser, however, appears to have been elected to King's College,
Cambridge, in 1543, and as he would have become ineligible at nineteen,
his birth cannot have taken place earlier than 1523, and, most
probably, did not take place before 1524 or 1525.
It appears from the pedigree recorded by his nephew, John Tusser, the
son of his eldest brother Clement, at the Herald's Visitation of Essex
in 1570, which is the only record we have of the family, that "William
Tusser, the father, had five sons, Clement, Andrew, John, THOMAS,
and William, and four daughters; the marriages of the daughters are
set down, but no wives assigned to the sons, except to Clement, who
married Ursula Petts, and had issue John (who entered the pedigree),
Edward, and Jane, all three unmarried in 1570. The mother of THOMAS was
[Isabella], a daughter of Thomas Smith, of Rivenhall, in Essex, Esq.,
whose elder brother, Hugh, was ancestor of Smith, Lord Carrington (not
the present lord), sister of Sir Clement Smith, who married a sister of
the Protector Somerset, and first cousin of Sir John Smith, one of the
Barons of the Exchequer in the reign of Edward the Sixth. This match
with Smith I take to have been the chief foundation of gentility in the
Tussers, for I can find no traces of them or their arms before this
connexion."[3]
At a very early age, and notwithstanding his mother's tears and
entreaties, he was placed by his father as a singing-boy in the
Collegiate Chapel of the Castle of Wallingford, in Berkshire, which,
according to Warton,[4] consisted of a dean, six prebendaries, six
clerks, and four choristers, and was dissolved in 1549. He has himself
recorded[5] in his homely and quaint style the hardships which he had
to endure at this school, the bare robes, the college fare, the stale
bread, and the penny ale. The excellence of his voice appears to have
attracted the notice of some of those persons to whom at that time
"placards" or commissions were issued, authorizing them to impress
singing-boys for the King's Chapel.[6] Afterwards, by the good offices
of some friend, he was admitted into the choir of St. Paul's Cathedral,
where he acquired a considerable proficiency in music under the tuition
of John Redford, the organist and almoner, of whom he speaks in terms
of the highest praise. From St. Paul's he was sent to Eton, probably
in 1540 or 1541, "to learn the Latin phrase," and was for some time
a pupil of Nicholas Udall,[7] the author of "Roister Doister," who
appears to have been a second Orbilius, and by whom he was unmercifully
thrashed, receiving on one occasion, "for fault but small, or none at
all," no fewer than fifty-three stripes.
From Eton he passed on to Cambridge, and, as already stated, was
elected to King's College in 1543,[8] but afterwards removed to
Trinity Hall, of which he appears to have retained pleasant memories.
Being obliged by a long illness to discontinue his studies, he left
the University, and joined the Court as a retainer of William, Lord
Paget,[9] by whom he was probably employed as a musician, and of whom
he speaks in terms of praise and affection. In this manner the next ten
years were passed, and during this time his parents died. At the end of
this period, either from disgust at the vices of the Court, or finding,
to use his own words, "the Court began to frown," he retired into the
country, married,[10] and settled down as a farmer at Cattiwade,[11]
a hamlet in the parish of Brantham, in Suffolk, and on the borders of
Essex, where he composed his "Hundredth Good Pointes of Husbandrie,"
the first edition of which appeared in 1557.
In consequence of his wife's ill-health, he removed to Ipswich, "a
town of price, like Paradise." Here his wife died, and he married Amy,
daughter of Edmond Moon, and settled down at West Dereham in Norfolk.
On leaving this town, on account of the litigious character of his
neighbours, he became, probably through the influence of his patron,
Sir Robert Southwell,[12] a lay-clerk or singing-man in the Cathedral
at Norwich, the Dean of which, John Salisbury, appears to have
befriended him in every way.
From Norwich a painful illness caused him to remove to Fairsted, about
four miles from Witham, in Essex, the tithes of which parish he farmed;
becoming involved in "tithing strife," he left that village, and once
more returned to London, where we find him living in St. Giles's,
Cripplegate, in 1572.[13] The plague, however, breaking out,[14] he
returned to Cambridge, where he at last found "a resting plot" in his
favourite College, Trinity Hall, in the choir of which he appears to
have been employed, as he was matriculated as a servant of the College,
probably on May 5th, 1573.[15]
His death, as appears from a paper read before the London and Middlesex
Archæological Society, took place in London, on the 3rd May, 1580, in
the fifty-fifth or fifty-sixth year of his age. His will,[16] which is
dated 25th April of that year, was proved by his son on the 8th August
following.
He was buried in the Church of St. Mildred, in the Poultry, where was
formerly, according to Stow,[17] a monument to his memory, inscribed as
follows:
"Here Thomas Tusser, clad in earth doth lie,
That sometime made the Poyntes of Husbandrie;
By him then learne thou maist, here learne we must,
When all is done we sleepe and turne to dust,
And yet through Christ to heaven we hope to go,
Who reades his bookes, shall find his faith was so."
This inscription is perfectly in character with the man, and was
probably written by Tusser himself.
A mural tablet to his memory has been erected in Manningtree Church in
Essex, with the following inscription: "Sacred to the memory of Thomas
Tusser, Gent., born at Rivenhall, in Essex, and occupier of Braham
Hall[18] near this town, in the reign of King Edward the Sixth, where
he wrote his celebrated poetical treatise, entitled, _Five Hundred
Points of Good Husbandry, etc._ His writings show that he possessed a
truly Christian spirit, and his excellent maxims and observations on
rural affairs evince that he was far in advance of the age in which he
lived. He died in London in 1580, at the age of 65, and was interred in
the parish church of St. Mildred in the Poultry, where the following
epitaph, said to have been written by himself, recorded his memory;"
then follows a copy of the epitaph already given.
The statement in this inscription that he wrote the "Five Hundred
Points" at Braham Hall is incorrect; what he did write there was the
"One Hundred Points of Good Husbandrie," afterwards enlarged to "Five
Hundred Points."
It has been a very generally received opinion that Tusser died in great
poverty. Fuller, in his "Worthies of Essex," p. 334, says, "Whether
he bought or sold, he lost, and when a renter impoverished himself,
and never enriched his landlord; he spread his bread with all sorts of
butter; yet none could stick thereon." Warton also says:[19] "Without
a tincture of careless imprudence, or vicious extravagance, this
desultory character seems to have thrived in no vocation."
Again, in Peacham's "Minerva," a book of emblems printed in 1612, there
is a device of a whetstone and a scythe, with these lines:--
"They tell me, Tusser, when thou wert alive,
And hadst for profit turned every stone,
Where'er thou camest, thou could'st never thrive,
Though hereto best thou could'st counsel every one,
As it may in thy Husbandry appear;
Wherein afresh thou liv'st among us here.
So like thy self, a number more are wont,
To sharpen others with advice of wit,
When they themselves are like the whetstone blunt."[20]
These statements, however, appear to be scarcely borne out by Tusser's
will. By it we find that, at the time of his death, his brother William
owed him £330, a large sum in those days, and, further, that he was
the owner of two small copyhold and leasehold farms. Had he been so
unfortunate in all his undertakings, and been, as Fuller terms him, "a
stone which gathers no moss," Tusser would hardly have been able to
lend his brother such a sum of money. If, however, it be true that he
lived and died poor, we may, in all probability, attribute it to his
love of hospitality, a prominent feature in his character, as well as
to a roving and unsteady disposition.
Dr. Mavor states in the introduction to his edition of 1810, p. 11,
that "it may be inferred from his [Tusser's] own words, that his
happiness was not permanently promoted by this match [his second
marriage]. He seems to complain of the charges incident 'to a wife in
youth,' and had she transmitted her thoughts to posterity, we should
probably have heard some insinuations against an old husband." I fail,
however, to see sufficient grounds for this assertion: on the contrary,
Tusser's words on the only occasion on which he speaks of his second
wife seem to bear an opposite construction:--
"I chanced soon to find a Moon
of cheerful hue;
Which well a fine me thought did shine
And never change--(a thing most strange)
Yet kept in sight her course aright,
And compass true."----Chapt. 114, stanza 19.
It is true that in several passages he speaks of the increased
expenses and responsibilities incident to a married life, but only,
as it appears to me, with the view of deterring others from entering
into that state without carefully considering beforehand the cost and
probable consequences of such a step.
By his first wife Tusser had no children, but by the second, who
survived him, he had three sons, Thomas, John and Edmond, and one
daughter Mary.
His will, which is exceedingly characteristic, is given in full at
the end of this introduction, from a copy in the British Museum,[21]
privately printed in 1846 by Mr. Charles Clark, of Great Totham, Essex,
from a transcript furnished to him by Mr. E. Ventris, of Cambridge, by
whom the original was discovered in the Registry at Ely.[22] At the
end of the will were printed Tusser's metrical Autobiography, and a
few notices from nearly contemporary authors. Mr. Clark also printed
in 1834 a few copies of the original edition of 1557 of the "Hundredth
good Poyntes of Husbandrie."
Tusser was, as may be seen from his writings, a man of high religious
principles, good-natured and cheerful, of a kindly and generous
disposition, and hospitable to a fault. Although he constantly
inculcates economy, he was entirely free from the meanness and pitiful
spirit, which, according to Stillingfleet, made farmers of his time
starve their cattle, their land and everything belonging to them;
choosing rather to lose a pound than spend a shilling. "Mirth and good
cheer," seems to have been his motto, and although he may have been
imprudent in allowing his love of hospitality to be carried to such
an excess as to keep him from independence, yet we cannot help loving
the man, and admiring the justness of his sentiments on every subject
connected with life and morals. Strict as he appears to have been
in all matters connected with religion, he was far from being what
he terms "fantastically scrupulous," or, as we should now say, of a
puritanical disposition. He prefers a merry fellow to a grave designing
villain:--
"Play thou the good fellow! seeke none to misdeeme;
Disdaine not the honest, though merie they seeme;
For oftentimes seene, no more verie a knave,
Than he that doth counterfeit most to be grave."[23]
How strongly, too, does he support the keeping up of the old
"feasting-daies," "Olde customes that good be let no man dispise," the
festivities of Christmas,[24] the Harvest Home, etc. His maxims on the
treatment of servants and dependents are conceived in a truly Christian
spirit, as when he says:--
"Once ended thy harvest, let none be beguil'd,
Please such as did help thee--man, woman, and child;
Thus doing with alway such help as they can,
Thou winnest the praise of the labouring man."
"Good servants hope justly some friendship to feel,
And look to have favour, what time they do well."
And again, such as these--
"Be lowly, not sullen, if aught go amiss,
What wresting may lose thee, that win with a kiss."
"Remember the poor that for God's sake do call,
For God both rewardeth and blesseth withall.
Take this in good part, whatsoever thou be,
And wish me no worse than I wish unto thee."
The versification of Tusser does not call for any lengthened remarks.
The greater portion of his work is written in the same anapæstic metre,
which, though rough, is well adapted for retention in the memory. There
are, however, two exceptions worthy of special notice: firstly, the
"Preface to the Buier" (ch. 5) and the "Comparison between Champion
Countrie and Severall" (ch. 63), which are the first examples of a
metre afterwards adopted by Prior and Shenstone, and generally believed
to have originated with the latter: secondly, the "Author's linked
verses" (ch. 113), a species of what Dr. Guest calls Inverse Rhime
in the following passage from his "History of English Rhythms":[25]
"Inverse Rhime is that which exists between the last accented syllable
of the first section, and the first accented syllable of the second.
It appears to have flourished most in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries. I do not remember any instance of it in Anglo-Saxon, but it
is probably of native growth.[26] A kindred dialect, the Icelandic,
had, at an early period, a species of rhime closely resembling the
present--the second verse always beginning with the last accented
syllable of the first. It is singular that the French had in the
sixteenth century a rhime like the Icelandic, called by them _la rime
entrelassée_. The present rhime differed from it, as it was contained
in one verse.... Thus:--
"'These steps| both _reach_|| and _teach_| thou shalt|
To come| by _thrift_|| to _shift_| withal|.'----Tusser.
"'The pi|pers _loud_|| and _loud_|er blew|,
The dan|cers _quick_|| and _quick_|er flew|.'----Burns."
The following are Tusser's principal peculiarities:--
1. The use of a plural noun with a verb singular. This very frequently
occurs. "_Some_," too, is almost invariably treated thus.
2. His omissions and elliptical phrases, such as [while]
_plough-cattle_ [are] _a-baiting_ (85/2); _thy market_ [having been]
_despatched_, 57/45; _a small_ [income] 62/11; in the mottoes of
the months, [work] _forgotten_ [in the] _month past_; and in such
expressions as "_fault known_" 47/22, "_that done_" 55/2, "_who
living_" 26/1, etc.
3. Peculiarities of rime. Tusser appears to have attributed far more
importance to the _outward appearance_ of his riming words, than to
the _reality_ of the rimes. So long as they _appeared_ to rime, it
seems to have mattered little that in _pronunciation_ they were widely
different. We thus find them constantly (_a_) changing the spelling of
words in order to make them _look like_ others; and again (_b_) using
as rimes words which, though similarly spelt, are totally unlike in
pronunciation. The following examples will suffice. In alterations of
orthography we find _weight_ (for wait) to rime with _eight; raies_
(for raise); _mutch_ to rime with _hutch; thease_ to rime with _ease;
ise_ (for ice) to rime with _device; flo_ (for flow) to rime with _fro;
feere_ (for fire or fier) to rime with _Janiveere; tought_ (for taught)
to rime with _thought; cace_ (for case) to rime with _place; waight_
(for wait) to rime with _straight; bilde_, to rime with _childe; thoes_
(for those) to rime with _sloes_, etc.
On the other hand, we find such rimes as the following: _plough, rough;
shew, few; have, save; have, crave; feat, great; overthwart, part;
shal, fal;_ and a very curious instance in Chapter 69, stanza 1, where
_thrive_ is made to rime with _atchive_.
* * * * *
If the number of editions through which an author's works pass be a
proof of merit, as it certainly is of popularity, few writers of his
time can enter into competition with Tusser. During the forty years
from the appearance of the first edition of the "One Hundreth Poyntes"
in 1557 to the end of the sixteenth century, no fewer than _thirteen_
editions of his work are known to have been published. Yet all are
scarce, and few of those surviving are perfect; a proof that what was
intended for practical use had been sedulously applied to that purpose.
"Some books," says Mr. Haslewood, in the "British Bibliographer," No.
iii., "become heir-looms from value; and Tusser's work, for useful
information in every department of agriculture, together with its
quaint and amusing observations, perhaps passed the copies from father
to son, till they crumbled away in the bare shifting of the pages,
and the mouldering relic only lost its value by the casual mutilation
of time." Subjoined is a list of all the various recorded editions,
extracted from Mavor's introduction and other sources.
1557. A Hundreth Good Pointes of Husbandrie. Reprinted here from the
unique copy in the British Museum.
1561. Thomas Hacher had licence for a "dyalogue of wyuynge and
thryuynge of Tusshers, with ij lessons for olde and yonge." Ritson,
though improperly, considers this as a different work from the piece
which appears under the same title in later editions.[27]
1562. It appears probable that this edition, though its existence
is disputed by some, contained the original germ of the Book of
Huswifery, as we find, on the authority of Warton, that in the
preceding year Richard Totell had licence to print "a booke entituled
one hundreth good poyntes of housbondry lately maryed unto a hundreth
poyntes of huswiffry, newly corrected and amplyfyed."[28]
1564. The existence of an edition of this date rests on the authority
of Otridge's Catalogue, 1794. It is probably a misprint for 1562.
1570. A hundreth good pointes of husbandry, lately maried unto a
hundreth good poynts of huswifery: newly corrected and amplified, with
dyuers proper lessons for householders, as by the table at the latter
ende more plainly may appeare. Set foorth by Thomas Tusser, gentleman,
servant to the right honorable lorde Paget of Beudesert. In ædibus
Richardii Tottyli, cum privilegio, Anno 1570.
1573. Five hundreth pointes of good husbandry united to as many of
good huswifery, first devised and more lately augmented, with divers
approved lessons, concerning hopps and gardening and other needful
matters, together with an abstract before every moneth, containing the
whole effect of the sayd moneth, with a table and a preface in the
beginning, both necessary to be reade, for the better understanding
of the booke. Set forth by Thomas Tusser, gentleman, servant to the
honorable lorde Paget of Beudesert. Imprinted at London in Flete
Strete within Temple Barre, at the signe of the hand and starre, by
Richard Tottell. Anno 1573. Cum privilegio.[29]
1577. A reprint of the above, by the same person [but with some
alterations, W.P.].
1580. The edition here reprinted, 4to.
1585. Five hundred pointes, etc. Newly set foorth by Thomas Tusser,
gentleman. At London, printed in the now dwelling house of Henrie
Denham, in Aldersgate Street, at the signe of the Starre.[30]
1586. By Denham, as before. 4to., pp. 164.
1590. By the assignees of Serres.[31]
1593. By Yardley. 4to. (in the Bodleian Library, M.)
1597. By Peter Short. 4to.
1599. Again by Peter Short.[32] Also by Waldegrave in Scotland. 4to.
1604. Printed for the Companie of Stationers. Five hundreth points of
good husbandrie: as well for the Champion or open countrie, as also
for the Woodland or Severall, mixed in every Month with Huswiferie,
over and besides the booke of Huswiferie. Corrected, better ordered
and newly augmented to a fourth part more, with divers other lessons,
as a diet for the farmer, of the properties of winds, plants, hops,
herbs, bees, and approved remedies for sheepe and cattell, with manie
other matters both profitable and not unpleasant for the Reader. Also
two tables, one of husbandrie, and the other of Huswiferie, at the
end of the booke; for the better and easier finding of any matter
contained in the same. Newlie set foorth by Thomas Tusser, gentleman,
etc. (Public Library, Cambridge, M.).
1610. Printed for the Company of Stationers. 4to.[33]
1614. id. id. 4to.
1620. id. id. The orthography in the title in some respects
more obsolete than in earlier impressions: thus we have _moneth_ for
_month_, and _hearbs_ for _herbs_. 4to. In British Museum.
1638. For the Company of Stationers. 4to.[34]
1672. Printed for T. R. and M. D. for the Company of Stationers. 146
pp., exclusive of the tables, closely printed.[35]
1692. Bibliotheca Farmeriana, No. 7349. Haslewood.
All the foregoing editions are in small 4to. black-letter [with roman
and italic headlines and occasional verses, W.P.].
1710. Tusser Redivivus. The Calendar of the twelve months with notes,
published in as many numbers, by Daniel Hilman, a Surveyor of Epsom in
Surry. 8vo. Lond. pp. 150.
1744. The same with a new title-page only. Printed for M. Cooper,
in Paternoster Row; and sold by J. Duncan, in Berkley Square, near
Grosvenor Gate. The title runs thus: Five Hundred points of Husbandry:
directing what grass, corn, etc., is proper to be sown; what trees
to be planted; how land is to be improved; with whatever is fit to
be done for the benefit of the FARMER, in every month of the YEAR.
By Thomas Tusser, Esq. To which are added notes and observations,
explaining many obsolete TERMS used therein, and what is agreeable
to the present practice in several counties of this kingdom. A work
very necessary and useful for gentlemen, as well as occupiers of land,
whether wood-ground or tillage and pasture.
1810. A very correct reprint of the First Edition of 1557 was issued
by R. Triphook and William Sancho.
1812. Five Hundred Points of good Husbandry, as well for the champion
or open country, as for the woodland or several; together with a Book
of Huswifery. Being a Calendar of rural and domestic Economy, for
every month in the year; and exhibiting a Picture of the Agriculture,
Customs, and Manners of England, in the Sixteenth Century. By Thomas
Tusser, Gentleman. A New Edition, with notes, Georgical, Illustrative
and Explanatory, a Glossary, and other Improvements. By William Mavor,
LL.D.,[36] Honorary Member of the Bard of Agriculture, etc.
"Multa renascentur, quæ jam cecidêre, cadentque,
Quæ nunc sunt in honore."---_Hor._
London, printed for Lackington, Allen & Co., Temple of the Muses,
Finsbury-Square, 8vo. 1812. Dedicated to the President and Members of
the Board of Agriculture, pp. 36, xl., and 338.
1834. Mr. Charles Clark of Great Totham, Essex, printed at his private
press a few copies of the original edition of 1557.
1848. A Selection was published at Oxford with the following title:
Five Hundred Points of Good Husbandry, by Thomas Tusser. Now newly
corrected and edited and heartily commended to all true lovers of
country life and honest thrift. By H. M. W. Oxford, 1848, 16mo.
The work is also included in Southey's Select Works of the British
Poets, 143-199.
_Extracts from the Registers of the Stationers' Company._
1557. John Daye had licence to print "the Hundreth poyntes of good
'_Husserie_.'" Regist. Station. A. fo. 23_a_.
1559-60. June 20. T. Marshe had licence "to print the boke of
Husbandry." Ibid. fo. 486. This last title occurs in these registers
much lower.
1561. Richard Tottell was to print "A boke intituled one hundreth good
poyntes of husboundry lately maryed unto a hundreth good poyntes of
Huswiffry newly corrected and amplyfyed." Ibid. fo. 74_a_.
1565. A licence to Alde to print "An hundreth poyntes of evell
huswyfraye," probably a satire or parody on Tusser. Ibid. fo. 131.
[1] The name of Tusser does not appear in the parochial registers at
Rivenhall, which only extend back to 1634. According to Dr. Mavor, the
name and race have long been extinct.
[2] History of English Poetry, 1840, vol. iii. p. 248.
[3] Letter from J. Townsend, Esq., Windsor Herald, to Dr. Mavor, quoted
in his edition of Tusser, p. 7.
[4] History of English Poetry, 1840, vol. iii. p. 248.
[5] See chapter 114, stanza 5.
[6] Dr. Rimbault, in his Cheque Book of the Chapel Royal, quotes the
following from _Liber Niger Domini Regis_ (temp. Edward VI.): "The
children of the Chappelle were 8 in number, with a Master of Songe to
teach them. And when any of the children comene to be xviij yeares of
age, and their voices change, ne cannot be preferred in this Chappelle,
the nombere being full, then, yf they will assente, the kyng assynethe
them to a College of Oxford or Cambridge of his fundatione, there to be
at fynding and studye both suffycyently, tylle the king may otherwise
advanse them."--Query, was Tusser assigned in this way to King's
College, Cambridge?
[7] Nicholas Udall took his degree of M.A. at Oxford in 1534.
[8] Hatcher, MSS. Catalog. Præpos. Soc. Schol. Coll. Regal. Cant.
[9] Of this nobleman, the ancestor of the Earl of Uxbridge, a very
full account is given in Dugdale, from which it appears that he was
born at Wednesbury in Staffordshire, his father being one of the
Serjeants-at-Mace of the city of London. Under Henry VIII. he was
Ambassador to France, and Master of the Post. In 1549 he obtained
a grant of the fee of the house without Temple Bar, first called
Paget House, then Leicester House, and lastly Essex House. Two years
afterwards he was Ambassador to the Emperor Charles V., and in the
same year was called by writ to Parliament by the title of Lord Paget
of Beaudesert, _Com. Salop._, and soon after sent to treat for peace
with France. On the fall of the Duke of Somerset, he was charged
with designing the murder of several noblemen at Paget House, and in
consequence was sent to the Tower, deprived of his honours and offices,
and fined £6000, one-third of which was remitted. On the death of
Edward VI. he joined the Earl of Arundel, the chief champion of Queen
Mary, and gained her favour by his activity. Soon after her marriage
with Philip, he was sent Ambassador to the Emperor at Brussels, to
consult Cardinal Pole respecting the restoration of Popery. In this
reign he was made Lord Privy Seal. Lord Paget died very aged, in 1563,
and was buried at Drayton in Middlesex. He left issue by Anne, daughter
of ---- Prestin, Esq., _Com. Lanc._, three sons and five daughters. His
eldest son Henry succeeded him in the title; but dying in 1568, the
peerage descended to his next brother, Thomas, whom Tusser claims also
for a patron. Thomas being zealously affected to Popery, and implicated
in the plots in favour of Mary Queen of Scots, fled and was attainted
1587, and died three years after at Brussels, leaving one son, Thomas,
who succeeded him.
[10] Of the name and family of his first wife we are entirely ignorant.
[11] In later editions printed Ratwade, and transferred to Sussex, a
mistake into which Warton has fallen.
[12] Tusser is generally supposed to have addressed Sir _Richard_
Southwell as "Thou worthy wight, thou famous knight," but it is clear
that Sir _Robert_ Southwell is intended, for in 1573 Tusser alludes to
Southwell's death as having occurred some years before, but Sir Richard
Southwell did not die till 1579, while Sir Robert died twenty years
previously.--Cooper, Ath. Cant.
[13] His second son, Edmond, was baptized at St. Giles's, Cripplegate,
13th March, 1572-3.
[14] The plague to which Tusser evidently alludes (in stanza 31 of
Autobiography), according to Maitland, raged in London in 1573 and 1574.
[15] Cooper, Ath. Cantab. vol. i. p. 422.
[16] See p. xxix.
[17] Survey of London, ed. 1618, p. 474. The church of St. Mildred was
destroyed in the Great Fire.
[18] Braham Hall was in 1460 the residence of Sir John Braham, and
is about a mile and a half from Manningtree, and in the parish of
Brantham, where Tusser first introduced the culture of barley;
"In _Brantham_ where rye but no barley did grow,
Good barley I had, as a many did know.
Five seam of an acre, I truly was paid,
For thirty load muck of each acre so laid."
--Chapt. 19, st. 9.
The field where barley first grew at Brantham is still pointed out by
tradition.
[19] Hist. of Eng. Poetry, vol. iii. p. 249.
[20] Thus altered in "Recreations for ingenious Head Pieces; or a
pleasant Grove for their Wits to walk in, etc.," 8vo. 1644:--
"Tusser, they tell me, when thou wert alive
Thou, teaching thrift, thyself could'st never thrive:
So, like the whetstone, many men are wont,
To sharpen others, when themselves are blunt."
[21] Shelf-mark, 10817, g.
[22] Notes and Queries, 1st Ser. vol. xii. p. 193.
[23] Chapter 30, stanza 3.
[24]
"What season then better of all the whole yeere
Thy needie poor neighbour to comfort and cheere?"
[25] Vol. i. pp. 136, 7.
[26] A very curious example is printed from Harl. MS. 913 in "Early
English Poems," ed. Furnivall, pp. 21, 2.
[27] This was probably a broadside edition of the Dialogue found in the
Book of Husbandry.
[28] No copy of this date is known to be extant, though it is mentioned
both in Weston's and King's Catalogues.
[29] This is the first edition of "Five Hundred Points."
[30] Differing very little from the preceding. It is probable that
Tusser might have left, before his death, some corrections on the ed.
of 1580, which were introduced into this. After this edition, errors
seem to have multiplied in every successive issue.
[31] In White's Catalogue, 1788; Mr. Ashby saw a copy in possession of
Dr. Lort.
[32] Extremely incorrect. Reprinted in "Somers' Tracts" by Sir W.
Scott, vol. iii. p. 403.
[33] An edition little known, but certainly existing.
[34] Payne's Catalogue, 1773; Deck's, 1792, little known.
[35] In this edition some errors are corrected, and the orthography is
considerably modernized.
[36] Rector of Woodstock.
THE LAST WILL OF THOMAS TUSSER.
In the name of God, Amen, the xxv of Aprill 1580. I, Thomas Tusser,
of Chesterton, in the Countye of Cambridge, Gentleman, being feeble
in bodye, but perfecte in memorie, thanks be to God, doe make and
ordaine this my Last Will and Testament in manner and forme following,
revokinge all other Wills heretofore made. That is to say, Ffirst
and principallye I give and betake my sowle to Allmightie God the
Father (my maker) and to his son Jesus Christ (my onelye Redeemer) by
whose merites I most firmelye beleve and trust to be saved and to be
partaker of lyef everlastinge, and to the Holye Gost (my Comforter)
Three personnes in one ever Godheade, whome I doe most humblye thanke
that he hathe mercifullye kepte me untill this tyme, and that he hathe
given me tyme and space to confesse and bewaile my sinnes, and that he
hathe forgiven me them all, thorough the merites of our Savioure Jesus
Christ, which I doe undoubtedlye beleve, because he hathe mercifullye
promised yt, to whome be praise for ever and ever, Amen.
_Item._ I give and bequeathe unto Thomas Tusser, my eldest Sonne, to
be delivered unto to him within one yere next after my decease Fyftye
Pounds of goode and lawful monye of England, parcell of the Three
Hundrethe and Thirtie Pownds which William Tusser my Brother dothe owe
unto me uppon one recognisaunce wherein he standethe bounde unto me
for the true paiment thereof; and my will is, That suche trustye Frend
or Frends, as shall be hereafter in this my last Will and Testament
named, shall have the use of the said Fiftie Pounds for and duringe
the nonage of my said Sonne Thomas, and untill suche time as he shall
accomplishe and come to the Age of xx and One Yeres, putting in
sufficient suerties for the true paiment thereof unto the said Thomas
my Sonne, and alsoe to paye for and towards the bringinge up of my
said Sonne Thomas, yerelye, the summe of Fyve Pownds untill he shall
accomplish and come to the Age of Twentye and One Yeres; and when my
said Sonne Thomas shall accomplishe his said Age of Twentye and One
Yeres, I will that the said summe of Fyftye Pownds shalbe, within one
monethe next ensueing after the said accomplishment of Twentye and One
Yeres unto him well and trulye contented and paid at one whole and
entire paiment, &c. &c. THOMAS TUSSER.
_Item._ I give unto John Tusser my second Sonne other Fyftie Pownds
of lawfull monye of England due unto me by the foresaid recognisance,
and to be bestowed and employed to his use duringe his minoritie, and
likewise to be paid unto him in suche and as lardge manner and forme
to all constructions and purposes as is before declared of the other
Fyftie Pownds before devised unto my Sonne Thomas Tusser; and also
Fyve Pownds to be paid yerely during his minoritie in manner and forme
before rehersed. THOMAS TUSSER.
_Item._ I give and bequeathe unto Edmond Tusser, my Sonne, and to
Marye Tusser, my daughter, and unto either of them the Summe of Fyftye
Pownds, due to me by force of the foresaid recognisaunce, and to be
bestowed and employed to the seuerall uses and benefitts of them and
either of them duringe their minorities, and likewise to be paid to
either of them in suche and as lardge manner and forme in everie
respect, to all constructions and purposes, as is before declared of
the Fyftye Pownds devised before to my Sonne Thomas Tusser; and also
Fyve Pownds a peece yerelye duringe their minorities, in manner and
forme before rehersed. THOMAS TUSSER.
_Item._ I give and bequeathe unto Amy Tusser, my Wyef, the summe of
Foure score Pownds of lawful monye of England dewe to me by force of
the said recognisaunce, and to be paid unto her within one whole yere
next ensewinge after my decease. THOMAS TUSSER.
_Item._ My will and intent is, That yf my brother William Tusser doe
accordinge unto the intent and true meaninge of this my last Will and
Testament well and truelye pay the foresaid severall summes of monye
before given and bequeathed, unto Amye, my Wyef, to Thomas my Sonne,
and to the rest of my children before named, and alsoe doe from tyme
to tyme and at all times hereafter save and kepe harmles my Heires,
Executors, and Administrators, and everie of them, of and from all
trobles, chardges, and excumbrances, which maye at anye time hereafter
come, rise, or growe for or by reason of any manner of Bonds wherein
I stande bounde for or with him as suertie, That then I give and
bequeathe unto him the summe of Fyftie Pownds being the residue of the
said Summe due unto me by the force of the said recognisance before
rehersed; and yf he doe not well and trulye performe the same, then I
give the said Fiftie Pownds unto my Executors of this my last Will and
Testament. THOMAS TUSSER.
_Item._ I will that yf anye of my children dye before they come to
and accomplishe theire foresaid severall Ages of xxi Yeres that then
I will that his or theire parts or portions shalbe destributed and
equallye divided to and amongst the rest of my other children then
survyveinge. THOMAS TUSSER.
_Item._ I give and bequeathe unto the afore-named Thomas Tusser, my
Sonne, and his Heires, all those seven Acres and a Roode of Copy
holde, which I nowe have lyinge in the Parish or Feilds of Chesterton;
to have and to holde the same, after the deathe of Amye, my Wyef, to
him his Heires and Assignes for ever. THOMAS TUSSER.
_Item._ I give also to the said Thomas Tusser, my Sonne, all suche
Estate and Tearme of Yeares as I have yet to come in a certain Close
called Lawyer's Close, lyinge and beinge in the Parish of Chesterton,
which said Close I have demised unto one William Mosse for the tearme
of one whole Yere begininge at the Feast of St. Gregorye last past,
yeldinge and payeinge for the same xxxvs. Rente, which said Rente
I doe also gyve to my said Sonne Thomas towards his bringinge up in
learninge. THOMAS TUSSER.
_Item._ I give also to the said Thomas my Bookes of Musicke and
Virginalls. THOMAS TUSSER.
_Item._ The residue of all my Bonds, Goods and Chattells, moveable
and immovable in Chesterton aforesaid or ellswhere, beinge in this
my last Will and Testament unbequeathed, I give to Amye, my Wyef,
dischardging all my debts and Funerall Expenses, not amountinge unto
above the summe of Twentye Marckes. And of this my last Will and
Testament I constitute my said Sonne Thomas Tusser my full and whole
Executor; and yf he happen to dye before he accomplishe his full Age
of Twentye and One Yeres, then I doe constitute and make John Tusser,
my second Sonne, my Executor. And yf yt fortune the said John to dye
before he accomplish the Age of xxi Yeares, I constitute and make
Edmond Tusser, my Sonne, my whole Executor; and yf yt happen the said
Edmond do dye before he dothe accomplish and come to the Age of xxi
Yeres, I do then make and constitute Amye Tusser, my Wyef, my full and
whole Executor of this my last Will and Testament. THOMAS TUSSER.
_Item._ I doe constitute ordaine and make one Edmond Moon, Gentleman,
Father to the said Amye, my Wyef, and Grandfather to my forenamed
Children, my said trustie Frend before mentioned in this my said last
Will and Testament, Guardian and Tutor unto my forenamed Children and
Supervisor and Overseer of this my last Will and Testament, unto whome
I doe next under God comitte bothe my Wyef and my forenamed Children
trustinge assuredlye that he will take a fatherlye care over them as
fleshe of his fleshe and bone of his bones. THOMAS TUSSER.
Those whose names be hereunder written beinge Witnesses to this
present last Will and Testament.
JOHN PLOMMER Of Barnard's Inne, in the Countye of Middlesex, Gentleman.
RICHARD CLUE.
THOMAS JEVE.
JAMES BLOWER.
WILIAM HYGEART.
_Mem._ That William Hygeart dwellethe in Southwerke, with Mr. Towlye,
Copper Smith; Richard Clue in St. Nicholas Lane, free of the Merchant
Taylers; Thomas Jeve, Ironmonger; James Blower, Servant, free of
Clotheworkers.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of the parties above named.
JOHN BOOTES.
FRANCIS SHACKELTON, the Parson of St. Myldred's in the Poultrie,
JOHN PLOMMER.
Proved in the Prerogative Court of the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
8th day of August 1580, by his Son, Thomas Tusser.
Fiue hundred pointes of good Husbandrie, as well for the Champion, or
open countrie, as also for the woodland, or Seuerall, mixed in euerie
Month with Huswiferie, ouer and besides the booke of Huswiferie,
corrected, better ordered, and newly augmented to a fourth part more,
with diuers other lessons, as a diet for the fermer, of the properties
of winds, planets, hops, herbes, bees, and approoued remedies for
sheepe & cattle, with many other matters both profitable, and not
vnpleasant for the Reader. Also a table of husbandrie at the beginning
of this booke: and another of huswiferie at the end: for the better and
easier finding of any matter conteined in the same.
Newly set foorth by Thomas Tusser Gentleman, servant to the honorable
Lorde Paget of Beaudesert.
Imprinted at London, by Henrie Denham, dwelling in Paternoster Row, at
the signe of the Starre.
1580.
_A Lesson.
A lesson how to confer euery abstract with his month, & how to finde
out huswiferie verses by the Pilcrowe, and Champion from Woodland._
In euerie month, er[1] in aught be begun,[E1]
Reade ouer that month, what auailes to be dun.
So neither this trauell[2] shall seeme to be lost:
Nor thou to repent of this trifeling cost.
The figure of abstract and month doo agree,
Which one to another relations bee.[E2]
These verses so short, without figure that stand,[3]
Be points of themselues, to be taken in hand.
¶[4]
In husbandrie matters, where Pilcrowe[E3] ye finde,
That verse appertaineth to huswiferie kinde.
So haue ye mo lessons, (if there ye looke well),
Than huswiferie booke doth vtter or tell.
Of Champion husbandrie now doo I write,
Which heretofore neuer this booke did recite.
With lessons approoued, by practise and skill:
To profit the ignorant, buie it that will.
The Champion differs from Seuerall much,
For want of partition, closier and such.
One name to them both doo I giue now & than,
For Champion countrie, and Champion man.
[1] yer. 1585.
[2] travail. 1577.
[3] The lessons that after those figures so stand. 1577.
[4] The edition of 1577 contains only the first two verses.
_The Table of Husbandrie.
A Table of the pointes of husbandrie mentioned in this booke._
* * * Roman words in [ ] are wanting in 1577 edition; _italics_ in [ ]
are additions in the edition of 1577, in which _y_ is substituted for
_ie_, and accented é is unused.
The Epistle to the Lord William Paget deceased, and the occasion first
of this booke.
The Epistle to the Lord Thomas Paget, second sonne, and now heire to
the Lord William Paget his father.
[_The Epistel_] To the Reader.
[An Introduction to the booke of husbandrie.]
[A Preface to the buier of this booke. _The preface._]
The commoditie[s] of husbandrie.
The praise of husbandrie [_by a redele_].
The description of [husband &] husbandrie.
The ladder [_of xxxiiij steps_] to thrift.
Good husbandlie lessons worthie to be followed of such as will thriue.
An habitation inforced, [_aduisedly_] better late than neuer; [_made_]
upon these wordes, Sit downe Robin and rest thée.
[The farmers dailie diet.
A description of the properties of winds all ye times of the yere.
Of the Planets.]
Septembers abstract.
[Other short remembrances for September.]
Septembers husbandrie [_with the nedeful furnyture of ye barne stable,
plough, cart, yard, & field, togither with the manner of gathering
hops, drying & keping them_].
[A digression to husbandlie furniture.
The residue of Septembers husbandrie, agréeing with his former
abstract.]
Octobers abstract.
[Other short remembrances for October.]
Octobers husbandrie.
[A digression to the vsage of diuers countries concerning tillage.
The residue of Octobers husbandrie, agréeing with his former abstract.]
Nouembers abstract.
[Other short remembrances for Nouember.]
Nouembers husbandrie [agréeing with his former abstract].
Decembers abstract.
[Other short remembrances for December.]
Decembers husbandrie [agréeing with his former abstract].
A digression [_directing_] to hospitalitie.
A description of time, and the yere.
A description of life & riches.
A description of houskéeping.
A description of [the feast of the birth of Christ, commonlie called]
Christmas.
A description of apt time to spend.
Against fantastical scruplenes.
Christmas husbandlie fare.
A Christmas caroll [of the birth of Christ, vpon the tune of king
Salomon].
Ianuaries abstract [_and at the end thereof diuers sorts of trees and
frutes to bee then set or remoued, following the order of ye alphabet
or crosserowe_].[E4]
[Other short remembrances for Ianuarie.
Of trées or fruites to be set or remooued.]
Ianuaries husbandrie [agréeing with his former abstract].
Februaries abstract.
[Other short remembrances for Februarie.]
Februaries husbandrie [agréeing with his former abstract].
Marches abstract [_and at the ende therof, the names of the seedes,
herbes, flowers & rootes than to be sowen or set, unles the time
be otherwise noted by expresse wordes, as wel for kitchin herbes,
strowing herbes & flowers, as herbes to stil & for phisick, set after
the order of the alphabet or crosserowe_].
[Other short remembrances for March.
Seedes and hearbes for the kitchen.
Herbes and rootes for sallets and sauce.
Herbs or rootes to boile or to butter.
Strowing herbs of all sorts.
Herbes, branches and flowers for windowes and pots.
Herbs to still in Summer.
Necessarie herbes to growe in the garden for Physicke not rehersed
before.]
Marches husbandrie [agréeing with his former abstract _with the maner
of setting of hops_].
Aprils abstract.
Aprils husbandrie [agréeing with his former abstract _with a lesson
for dairy maide Cisseley and of x toppings gests in hir whitmeat,
better lost then found_.]
[A digression to dairie matters.
A lesson for dairie maid Cisley of ten toppings gests.]
Maies abstract.
[Two other short remembrances for Maie.]
Maies husbandrie [agréeing with his former abstract].
Junes abstract.
[A lesson of hopyard.]
Junes husbandrie [agréeing with his former abstract, _with a lesson to
chuse a meete plot for hopps and howe then to be doing with the same_.]
[A lesson where and when to plant good hopyard.]
Julies abstract.
Julies husbandrie [agréeing with his former abstract _and hay
harvest_].
Augusts abstract.
[Workes after haruest.]
Augusts husbandrie [agréeing with his former abstract _& corne
haruest_].
[Corne haruest equally diuided into ten partes.]
[_The conclusion of the whole booke set out in_ 12 _verses euery word
beginning with a T ye first letter of the Authors name_.]
[A briefe conclusion in verse, euerie word beginning with a T.]
Mans age [_divided into xij prentiships_, from seuen yeares to
fourescore and foure].
[_A briefe description of thenclinations of mans age by the similitude
of the Ape, Lion, Foxe, & the Asse_.]
[Another diuision of the nature of mans age.]
A comparison betwéene good husband[rie] and [bad _euill_].
A comparison betwéene [_woodland &_ Champion] countrie and Seuerall.
[The description of an enuious and naughtie neighbour.]
[_A Sonet howe to set a candle afore the Deuill_.]
A Sonet against a slaunderous tongue.
A Sonet [_to his Lord & Master of his first vij yeres seruice_ vpon
the Authors first seuen yeres seruice].
[The Authors _A_] dialogue betweene two Bachelers [_batchillers_],
of wiuing & thriuing, by affirmation & negation [_& the maryed mans
iudgment thereof_].
[The wedded mans iudgement taking vp the matter of wiuing and thriuing.
How ewes should be vsed that are néere lambing.
How lambes should be vsed when they are yoong.
What times are most méete for rearing of calues.
How to cure the wrigling of ye taile in a shéepe or a lambe.
Of gelding horsecolts.
A waie how to haue large bréede of hogs.
A medicine for faint cattle.
Howe to fasten loose téeth in a bullocke.
How to preuent the breeding of the bots in horses.
A medicine for the cowlaske.[E5]
Of burieng dead cattle.
A waie how to preserue bées.
What is to be done with measeled hogs.
What times are most méete for letting of horses blood.]
The Table of Huswiferie you shall finde at the ende of the booke.
FINIS.
* * * Tusser's references to pages are omitted.
¶ _The Author's Epistle to the late Lord William Paget, wherein he doth
discourse of his owne bringing vp, and of the goodnes of the said
Lord his master vnto him, and the occasion of this his booke, thus
set forth of his owne long practise.
Chap._ 1.
_1[E6]
T Time trieth the troth,[E7] in euerie thing,
H Herewith let men content their minde,[1]
O Of works, which best may profit bring,
M Most rash to iudge, most often blinde.
A As therefore troth in time shall craue,
S So let this booke iust fauor haue.
T Take you my Lord and Master than,
U Vnlesse mischance mischanceth me,[E8]
S Such homelie gift, of me your man,
S Since more in Court I may not be,
A And let your praise, wonne heretofore,
R Remaine abrode for euermore.[E9]
M My seruing you, (thus vnderstand,)
A And God his helpe, and yours withall,[E10]
D Did cause good lucke to take mine hand,
E Erecting one most like to fall.
M My seruing you, I know it was,
E Enforced this to come to pas.
Since being once at Cambridge taught,
Of Court ten yeeres I made assaie,
No Musicke then was left vnsaught,
Such care I had to serue that waie.
When ioie gan slake, then made I change,
Expulsed[2] mirth, for Musicke strange.
My Musicke since hath bene the plough,
Entangled with some care among,
The gaine not great, the paine ynough,
Hath made me sing another song.
Which song, if well I may auow,
I craue it iudged be by yow._
Your seruant Thomas Tusser.
[1] How euery man doth please his mind. 1577.
[2] Expelled. 1585.
¶ _To the Right Honorable and my speciall good Lord and Master, the
Lord Thomas Paget of Beaudesert, sone and heire to his late[1]
father deceased.
Chap._ 2.
My Lord, your father looued me,
and you my Lord haue prooued me,
and both your loues haue mooued me,
to write as here is donne:
Since God hath hence your father,
such flowers as I gather,
I dedicate now rather,
to you my Lord his sonne.
Your father was my founder,
till death became his wounder,
no subiect euer sounder,
whome Prince aduancement gaue:
As God did here defend him,
and honour here did send him,
so will I here commend him,
as long as life I haue.
His neighbours then did blisse him,
his seruants now doe misse him,
the poore would gladlie kisse him,
aliue againe to be:
But God hath wrought his pleasure,
and blest him, out of measure,
with heauen and earthlie treasure,
so good a God is he.
[Sidenote: _Ceres_ the Goddesse of husbandrie.]
His counsell had I vsed,
and _Ceres_ art refused,
I neede not thus haue mused,
nor droope as now I do:
But I must plaie the farmer,
and yet no whit the warmer,
although I had his armer,
and other comfort to.
[Sidenote: Æsops fable.]
The Foxe doth make me minde him,
whose glorie so did blinde him,
till taile cut off behinde him,
no fare could him content:
Euen so must I be proouing,
such glorie I had in loouing,
of things to plough behoouing,
that makes me now repent.
[Sidenote: Salust.]
Loiterers I kept so meanie,
both Philip, Hob, and Cheanie,
that, that waie nothing geanie,
was thought to make me thriue:
Like _Iugurth_, Prince of _Numid_,[E11]
my gold awaie consumid,
with losses so perfumid,[E12]
was neuer none aliue.
Great fines so neere did pare me,
great rent so much did skare me,
great charge so long did dare me,
that made me at length crie creake:[E13]
Much more[2] of all such fleeces,[E14]
as oft I lost by peeces,
among such wilie geeces
I list no longer speake.
Though countrie health long staid me,
yet lesse[3] expiring fraid me,
and (_ictus sapit_[E15]) praid me
to seeke more steadie staie:
New lessons then I noted,
and some of them I coted,[4]
least some should think I doted,
by bringing naught awaie.
[Sidenote: _Pallas_, Goddesse of wisdome and cunning.]
Though _Pallas_ hath denide me,
hir learned pen to guide me,
for that she dailie spide me,
with countrie how I stood:
Yet _Ceres_ so did bold me,
with hir good lessons told me,
that rudenes cannot hold me,
from dooing countrie good.
By practise and ill speeding,
these lessons had their breeding,
and not by hearesaie, or reeding,
as some abrode haue blowne:
Who will not thus beleeue me,
so much the more they greeue me,
because they grudge to geeue me,
that is of right mine owne.
At first for want of teaching,
at first for trifles breaching,
at first for ouer reaching,[5]
and lacke of taking hid,[6]
was cause that toile so tost me,
that practise so much cost me,
that rashnes so much lost me,
or hindred as it did.
Yet will I not despaier
thorough Gods good gift so faier
through friendship, gold, and praier,
in countrie againe to dwell:
Where rent so shall not paine me,
but paines shall helpe to gaine me,
and gaines shall helpe maintaine me,
New lessons mo to tell.
For citie seemes a wringer,
the penie for to finger,
from such as there doe linger,
or for their pleasure lie:
Though countrie be more painfull,
and not so greedie gainfull,
yet is it not so vainfull,
in following fansies eie.
I haue no labour wanted
to prune this tree thus planted,
whose fruite to none is scanted,
in house or yet in feeld:
Which fruite, the more ye taste of,
the more to eate, ye haste of,
the lesse this fruite ye waste of,[7]
such fruite this tree doth yeeld.
My[8] tree or booke thus framed,
with title alreadie named,
I trust goes forth vnblamed,
in your good Lordships name:
As my good Lord I take you,
and neuer will forsake you,
so now I craue to make you
defender of the same.
_Your seruant Thomas Tusser_.
[1] In the edition of 1575 the word Thomas, and the words following
Beaudesert, do not occur, and the whole Epistle precedes that to Lord
William Paget.
[2] mort. 1620.
[3] lease. 1585 and 1620.
[4] quoted. 1585 and 1620.
[5] reacing. 1599.
[6] hede. 1577.
[7]
Which fruite to say (who hast of)
though nere so much they taste of
yet can they make no waste of. 1577.
[8] this. 1573. 1577.
¶ _To the Reader.
Chap._ 3.
I have been praid
to shew mine aid,
in taking paine,
not for the gaine,
but for good will,
to shew such skill
as shew I could:
That husbandrie
with huswiferie
as cock and hen,
to countrie men,
all strangenes gone,
might ioine in one,
as louers should.
I trust both this
performed is,
and how that here
it shall appere,
with iudgement right,
to thy delight,
is brought to passe:
That such as wiue,
and faine would thriue,
be plainly taught
how good from naught
may trim be tride,
and liuely spide,
as in a glasse.
What should I win,
by writing in
my losses past,
that ran as fast
as running streame,
from reame to reame
that flowes so swift?
For that I could
not get for gould,
to teach me how,
as this doth yow,
through daily gaine,
the waie so plaine
to come by thrift.
What is a grote
or twaine to note,
once in the life
for man or wife,
to saue a pound,
in house or ground,
ech other weeke?[E16]
What more for health,
what more for wealth,
what needeth lesse,
run Iack, helpe Besse,
to staie amis,
not hauing this,
far off to seeke?
I do not craue
mo thankes to haue,
than giuen to me
alreadie be,
but this is all
to such as shall
peruse this booke:
That for my sake,
they gently take,
where ere they finde
against their minde,
when he or she
shall minded be
therein to looke.
And grant me now,
thou reader thow,
of termes to vse,
such choise to chuse,
as may delight
the countrie wight,
and knowledge bring:
For such doe praise
the countrie phraise,
the countrie acts,
the countrie facts,
the countrie toies,
before the ioies
of anie thing.
Nor looke thou here
that euerie shere[E17]
of euerie verse
I thus reherse
may profit take
or vantage make
by lessons such:
For here we see
things seuerall bee,
and there no dike,
but champion like,
and sandie soile,
and claiey toile,
doe suffer[1] much.
This[2] being waid,
be not afraid
to buie to proue,
to reade with loue,
to followe some,
and so to come
by practise true:
My paine is past,
thou warning hast,
th' experience mine,
the vantage thine,
may giue thee choice
to crie or reioice:
and thus adue.
_Finis T. Tusser._
[1] differ. 1573; suffer. 1577.
[2] Thus. 1577.
¶ _An Introduction to the Booke of Husbandrie.[1]
Chap._ 4.
Good husbandmen must moile & toile,
to laie to liue by laboured feeld:
Their wiues at home must keepe such coile,[E18]
as their like actes may profit yeeld.
For well they knowe,
as shaft from bowe,
or chalke from snowe,
A good round rent their Lords they giue,
and must keepe touch in all their paie:
With credit crackt else for to liue,
or trust to legs and run awaie.
[Sidenote: _Ceres_, Goddesse of husbandry.]
Though fence well kept is one good point,
and tilth well done, in season due;
Yet needing salue in time to annoint,
is all in all and needfull true:
As for the rest,
thus thinke I best,
as friend doth gest,
With hand in hand to leade thee foorth
to _Ceres_ campe, there to behold
A thousand things as richlie woorth,
as any pearle is woorthie gold.
[1] This Introduction is not in the editions of 1573 or 1577.
¶ _A Preface to the buier of this booke.
Chap._ 5.
What lookest thou herein to haue?
Fine verses thy fansie to please?
Of many my betters that craue,
Looke nothing but rudenes in thease.[E19]
What other thing lookest thou then?
Graue sentences many to finde?
Such, Poets haue twentie and ten,
Yea thousands contenting the minde.
What looke ye, I praie you shew what?
Termes painted with Rhetorike fine?
Good husbandrie seeketh not that,
Nor ist any meaning of mine.
What lookest thou, speake at the last?
Good lessons for thee and thy wife?
Then keepe them in memorie fast,
To helpe as a comfort to life.
What looke ye for more in my booke?
Points needfull and meete to be knowne?
Then dailie be suer to looke,
To saue to be suer thine owne.
* * * Mason remarks that this metre was peculiar to Shenstone.[E20]
_The commodities of Husbandrie.
Chap._ 6.
_Let house haue to fill her,
Let land haue to till her._
No dwellers, what profiteth house for to stand?
What goodnes, vnoccupied, bringeth the land?
_No labor no bread,
No host we be dead._
No husbandry vsed, how soone shall we sterue?
House keeping neglected, what comfort to serue?
_Ill father no gift,
No knowledge no thrift._
The father an vnthrift, what hope to the sonne?
The ruler vnskilfull, how quickly vndonne?
_Chap._ 7.
_As true as thy faith
This riddle thus saith._
[Sidenote: The praise of husbandrie.]
I seeme but a drudge, yet I passe any King
To such as can vse me, great wealth I do bring.
Since Adam first liued, I neuer did die,
When Noe was shipman, there also was I.
The earth to susteine me, the sea for my fish:[E21]
Be readie to pleasure me, as I would wish.[1]
What hath any life, but I helpe to preserue,
What wight without me, but is ready to sterue.
In woodland, in Champion, Citie, or towne
If long I be absent, what falleth not downe?
If long I be present, what goodnes can want?
Though things at my comming were neuer so scant.
So many as looue me, and vse me aright,
With treasure and pleasure, I richly acquite.
Great kings I doe succour, else wrong it would go,
The King of al kings hath appointed it so.
[1]
The earth is my storehouse, the sea my fishpond,
What good is in either, by me it is found. 1577.
¶ _The description of Husbandrie.
Chap._ 8.
Of husband, doth husbandrie challenge that name,
of husbandrie, husband doth likewise the same
Where huswife and huswiferie, ioineth with thease,
there wealth in abundance is gotten with ease.
The name of a husband, what is it to saie?
of wife and the houshold the band and the staie:
Some husbandlie thriueth that neuer had wife,
yet scarce a good husband in goodnes of life.
The husband is he that to labour doth fall,
the labour of him I doe husbandrie call:
If thrift by that labour be any way caught,
then is it good husbandrie, else it is naught.
So houshold and housholdrie I doe define,
for folke and the goodes that in house be of thine
House keeping to them, as a refuge is set,
which like as it is, so report it doth get.
Be house or the furniture neuer so rude,
of husband and husbandrie, (thus I conclude:)
That huswife and huswiferie, if it be good,
must pleasure togither as cosins in blood.
¶ _The Ladder to thrift.
Chap._ 9.
To take thy calling thankfully,[E22]
and shun[1] the path to beggery.
To grudge in youth no drudgery,
to come by knowledge perfectly.
To count no trauell slauerie,
that brings in penie sauerlie.
To folow profit earnestlie
but meddle not with pilferie.
To get by honest practisie,
and kéepe thy gettings couertlie.
To lash not out too lashinglie,
for feare of pinching penurie.
To get good plot to occupie,
and store and vse it husbandlie.
To shew to landlord curtesie,
and kéepe thy couenants orderlie.
To hold that thine is lawfullie,
for stoutnes or for flatterie.
To wed good wife for companie,
and liue in wedlock honestlie.
To furnish house with housholdry,
and make prouision skilfully.
To ioine to wife good familie,[E23]
and none to kéepe for brauerie.
To suffer none liue idlelie,
for feare of idle knauerie.
To courage wife in huswiferie,
and vse well dooers gentilie.
To keepe no more but néedfullie,
and count excesse vnsauerie.
To raise betimes the lubberlie,
both snorting Hob and Margerie.[2]
To walke thy pastures vsuallie,
to spie ill neighbours subtiltie.
To hate reuengement hastilie,
for loosing loue and amitie.
To loue thy neighbor neighborly,
and shew him no discurtesy.
To answere stranger ciuilie,
but shew him not thy secresie.
To vse no friend deceitfully,
to offer no man villeny.
To learne how foe to pacifie,
but trust him not too trustilie.
To kéepe thy touch substanciallie,
and in thy word vse constancie.
To make thy bandes aduisedly,
& com not bound through suerty.
To meddle not with vsurie,
nor lend thy monie foolishlie.
To hate to liue in infamie,
through craft, and liuing shiftingly.[3]
To shun all kinde of treachery,
for treason endeth horribly.
To learne to eschew ill cōpany,
and such as liue dishonestly.
To banish house of blasphemie,
least crosses crosse vnluckelie.[E24]
To stop mischance, through policy,
for chancing too vnhappily.
To beare thy crosses patiently,
for worldly things are slippery.
To laie to kéepe from miserie,
age comming on so créepinglie.
To praie to God continuallie,
for aide against thine enimie.
To spend thy Sabboth holilie,
and helpe the needie pouertie.[4]
To liue in conscience quietly,
and kéepe thy selfe from malady.
To ease thy sicknes spéedilie,
er helpe be past recouerie.
To séeke to God for remedie,
for witches prooue vnluckilie.
[38]
These be the steps vnfainedlie:
to climbe to thrift by husbandrie.
[39]
_These steps both reach, and teach thee shall:
To come by thrift, to shift withall._
* * * Stanzas 25, 27, 28, 32, 37 are not in the edition of 1577. After
31 the edition of 1577 has:--
To train thy child vp vertuously
that vertue vice may qualifie.
To bridle wild otes fantasie,[E25]
to spend thee naught vnthriftely.
[1] shonne. 1577.
[2] To rise betimes up readely. 1577.
[3] naughtily. 1573, 1557.
[4] poore in misery. 1577.
10.
¶ _Good husbandlie lessons worthie to be followed of such as will
thriue.
Chap._ 10.
God sendeth and giueth both mouth and the meat,
and blesseth vs al with his benefits great:
Then serue we that God that so richly doth giue,
shew loue to our neighbors, and lay for to liue.
2[1]
As bud by appearing betokneth the spring,
and leafe by her falling the contrarie thing:
So youth bids vs labour, to get as we can,
for age is a burden to laboring man.
A competent liuing, and honestly had,
makes such as are godlie both thankfull and glad:
Life neuer contented, with honest estate,
lamented is oft, and repented too late.
Count neuer wel gotten that naughtly is got,
nor well to account of which honest is not:[E26]
Looke long not to prosper, that wayest not this,
least prospering faileth, and all go amisse.
[Sidenote: Laie wisely to marrie.]
True wedlock is best, for auoiding of sinne,
the bed vndefiled much honour doth winne:
Though loue be in choosing farre better than gold,
let loue come with somewhat, the better to hold.[E27]
[Sidenote: Concord bringeth foyson.]
Where cooples agree not is ranker and strife,
where such be together is seldome good life:
Where cooples in wedlock doe louelie agree,
there foyson remaineth, if wisedome there bee.
[Sidenote: Wife and children craue a dwelling.]
Who looketh to marrie must laie to keepe house,
for loue may not alway be plaieing with douse:
If children encrease, and no staie of thine owne,
what afterwards followes is soone to be knowne.
[Sidenote: Thee for thriue.]
[Sidenote: Hostisses grudge: nurses craue.]
Once charged with children, or likelie to bee,
giue ouer to sudgerne, that thinkest to thee:[E28]
Least grutching of hostis, and crauing of nurse,
be costlie and noisome to thee and thy purse.
[Sidenote: Live within thy Tedder.]
Good husbands that loueth good houses to keepe
are oftentimes careful when other doe sleepe:
To spend as they may, or to stop at the furst,
for running in danger, or feare of the wurst.
[Sidenote: By haruest is ment al thy stock.]
Go count with thy cofers,[2] when haruest is in,
which waie for thy profite, to saue or to win:
Of tone of them both, if a sauer wee smel,[E29]
house keeping is godlie where euer we dwel.
[Sidenote: Be thine own purs bearer.]
Sonne, think not thy monie purse bottom to burn,
but keepe it for profite, to serue thine owne turn:
A foole and his monie be soone at debate,
which after with sorrow repents him too late.[E30]
Good bargaine a dooing, make priuie but few,
in selling, refraine not abrode it to shew:
In making make haste, and awaie to thy pouch,
in selling no haste, if ye dare it auouch.[E31]
[Sidenote: Euill landlord.]
Good Landlord who findeth, is blessed of God,
A cumbersome Landlord is husbandmans rod:
He noieth, destroieth, and al to this drift,
to strip his poore tenant of ferme and of thrift.
[Sidenote: Rent corne.]
14[3]
Rent corn[E32] who so paieth, (as worldlings wold haue,
so much for an aker) must liue as a slaue:
Rent corne to be paid, for a reasnable rent,
at reasnable prises is not to lament.
[Sidenote: Foure beggers.]
Once placed for profit, looke neuer for ease,
except ye beware of such michers[E33] as thease:
Unthriftines, Slouthfulnes, Careles and Rash,
that thrusteth thee headlong to run in the lash.
[Sidenote: Thrifts officers.]
Make monie thy drudge, for to follow thy warke,
Make wisedome controler, good order thy clarke:
Prouision Cater, and skil to be cooke,
make steward of all, pen, inke, and thy booke.
[Sidenote: Thrifts phisicke.]
Make hunger thy sauce,[E34] as a medcine for helth,
make thirst to be butler, as physick for welth:
Make eie to be vsher, good vsage to haue,
make bolt to be porter, to keepe out a knaue.
[Sidenote: Thrifts bailie.]
Make husbandrie bailie, abrode to prouide,
make huswiferie dailie at home for to guide:
Make cofer fast locked, thy treasure to keepe,
make house to be sure, the safer to sleepe.
[Sidenote: Husbandly armors.]
Make bandog[E35] thy scoutwatch, to barke at a theefe,
make courage for life to be capitaine cheefe:
Make trapdore thy bulwarke, make bell to be gin,[4]
make gunstone and arrow shew who is within.
[Sidenote: Théeves to thrift.]
The credite of maister, to brothell his man,
and also of mistresse, to minnekin Nan,
Be causers of opening a number of gaps,
That letteth in mischiefe and many mishaps.[E36]
[Sidenote: Friends to thrift.]
Good husband he trudgeth, to bring in the gaines,
good huswife she drudgeth, refusing no paines:
Though husband at home be to count[5] ye wote what,[E37]
yet huswife within is as needfull as that.
[Sidenote: Enimie to thrift.]
What helpeth in store to haue neuer so much,
halfe lost by ill vsage, ill huswiues, and such:
So, twentie lode bushes, cut downe at a clap,
such heede may be taken, shall stop but a gap.[E38]
[Sidenote: Sixe noiances to thrift.]
A retcheles[6] seruant, a mistres that scowles,
a rauening mastife, and hogs that eate fowles:
A giddie braine maister, and stroyal his knaue,
brings ruling to ruine, and thrift to hir graue.
[Sidenote: Inough is a praise.]
With some vpon Sundaies, their tables doe reeke,
and halfe the weeke after, their dinners to seeke:[E39]
Not often exceeding, but alwaie inough,
is husbandlie fare, and the guise of the plough.
Ech daie to be feasted, what husbandrie wurse,
ech daie for to feast, is as ill for the purse:
Yet measurely feasting with neighbors among,
shal make thee beloued, and liue the more long.
[Sidenote: Thrifts aduises.]
Things husbandly handsom let workman contriue,
but build not for glorie, that thinkest to thriue:
Who fondlie in dooing consumeth his stock,
in the end for his follie doth get but a mock.
[Sidenote: Spoilers to thrift.]
Spend none but your owne, howsoeuer ye spend,
for bribing[7] and shifting, haue seldom good end:
In substance although ye haue neuer so much,
delight not in parasites, harlots, and such.[8]
Be suretie seldome, (but neuer for much)
for feare of purse penniles hanging by such:
Or Skarborow warning,[E40] as ill I beleeue,
when (sir I arest yee[E41]) gets hold of thy sleeue.
Use (_legem pone_[E42]) to paie at thy daie,
but vse not (_Oremus_[E43]) for often delaie:
Yet (_Præsta quæsumus_[E44]) out of a grate,
Of al other collects,[E45] the lender doth hate.
30[9]
Be pinched by lending, for kiffe nor for kin,
nor also by spending, by such as come in;
Nor put to thy hand betwixt bark and the tree,
least through thy owne follie so pinched thou bee.[E46]
As lending to neighbour, in time of his neede,
winnes love of thy neighbour, and credit doth breede,
So neuer to craue, but to liue of thine owne,
brings comforts a thousand, to many vnknowne.
Who liuing but lends? and be lent to they must;
else buieng and selling might lie in the dust;
But shameles and craftie, that desperate are,
make many ful honest the woorser to fare.[E47]
At some time to borow, account it no shame,
if iustlie thou keepest thy touch for the same:
Who quick be to borow, and slow be to paie,
their credit is naught, go they neuer so gaie.
34[10]
By shifting and borrowing, who so as liues,
not well to be thought on, occasion giues:
Then lay to liue warily, and wisely to spend,
for prodigall liuers haue seldom good end.
35[11]
Some spareth too late, and a number with him,
the foole at the bottom, the wise at the brim:[E48]
Who careth nor spareth, till spent he hath all,
Of bobbing, not robbing, be fearefull he shall.
Where welthines floweth, no friendship can lack,
whom pouertie pincheth, hath friendship as slack:
Then happie is he by example that can
take heede by the fall of a mischieued man.[E49]
Who breaketh his credit, or cracketh it twise,
trust such with a suretie, if ye be wise:
Or if he be angrie, for asking thy due,
once euen, to him afterward, lend not anue.
Account it wel sold that is iustlie well paid,
and count it wel bought that is neuer denaid:
But yet here is tone, here is tother doth best,
for buier and seller, for quiet and rest.
Leaue Princes affaires undeskanted on,
and tend to such dooings as stands thee vpon:[E50]
Feare God, and offend not the Prince nor his lawes,
and keepe thyselfe out of the Magistrates clawes.[12]
As interest or vsurie plaieth the dreuil,
so hilback and filbellie biteth as euil:
Put dicing among them, and docking the dell:
and by and by after, of beggerie smell.[13]
[Sidenote: Thrifts Auditor.]
Once weekelie remember thy charges to cast,
once monthlie see how thy expences may last:
If quarter declareth too much to be spent,
for feare of ill yeere take aduise of thy rent.
Who orderlie entreth his paiment in booke,
may orderlie find them againe (if he looke.)
And he that intendeth but once for to paie:
shall find this in dooing the quietest waie.
In dealing vprightlie this counsel I teach,
first recken, then write, er[14] to purse yee doe reach,
Then paie and dispatch him, as soone as ye can:
for lingring is hinderance to many a man.
Haue waights, I aduise thee, for siluer & gold,
for some be in knauerie now a daies bold:
And for to be sure good monie to pay:
receiue that is currant, as neere as ye may.
Delight not for pleasure two houses to keepe,
least charge without measure vpon thee doe creepe.
And Jankin and Jenikin[E51] coosen thee so
to make thee repent it, er yeere about go.
The stone that is rouling can gather[15] no mosse,[E52]
who often remooueth is sure of losse.
The rich it compelleth to paie for his pride;
the poore it vndooeth on euerie side.
The eie of the maister enricheth the hutch,
the eie of the mistresse auaileth as mutch.
Which eie, if it gouerne, with reason and skil,
hath seruant and seruice, at pleasure and wil.
Who seeketh reuengement of euerie wrong,
in quiet nor safetie continueth long.
So he that of wilfulnes trieth the law,
shall striue for a coxcome, and thriue as a daw.[E53]
To hunters and haukers, take heede what ye saie,
milde answere with curtesie driues them awaie:
So, where a mans better wil open a gap,
resist not with rudenes, for feare of mishap.[E54]
A man in this world for a churle that is knowne,
shall hardlie in quiet keepe that is his owne:
Where lowlie and such as of curtesie smels,
finds fauor and friendship where euer he dwels.
Keepe truelie thy Saboth, the better to speed,
Keepe seruant from gadding, but when it is need.
Keepe fishdaie and fasting daie, as they doe fal:[E55]
what custome thou keepest, let others keepe al.
52[16]
Though some in their tithing be slack or too bold,
be thou vnto Godward not that waie too cold:
Euill conscience grudgeth, and yet we doe see
ill tithers ill thriuers most commonlie bee.
Paie weekelie thy workman, his houshold to feed,
paie quarterlie seruants, to buie as they need:
Giue garment to such as deserue and no mo,
least thou and thy wife without garment doe go.
Beware raskabilia, slothfull to wurke,
purloiners and filchers, that loueth to lurke.
Away with such lubbers, so loth to take paine,
that roules in expences, but neuer no gaine.
Good wife, and good children, are worthie to eate,
good seruant, good laborer, earneth their meate:
Good friend, and good neighbor, that fellowlie gest,
with hartilie welcome, should haue of the best.
Depart not with al that thou hast to thy childe,
much lesse vnto other, for being beguilde:
Least, if thou wouldst gladlie possesse it agen,
looke for to come by it thou wottest not when.
The greatest preferment that childe we can giue,
is learning and nurture, to traine him to liue:
Which who so it wanteth, though left as a squier,
consumeth to nothing, as block in the fier.
When God hath so blest thee, as able to liue,
and thou hast to rest thee, and able to giue,
Lament thy offences, serue God for amends,
make soule to be readie when God for it sends.
Send fruites of thy faith to heauen aforehand,
for mercie here dooing, God blesseth thy land:
He maketh thy store with his blessing to swim,
and after, thy soule to be blessed with him.
Some lay to get riches by sea and by land,
and ventreth his life in his enimies hand:
And setteth his soule vpon sixe or on seauen,[E56]
not fearing nor caring for hell nor for heauen.
Some pincheth, and spareth, and pineth his life,
to cofer vp bags for to leaue to his wife:
And she (when he dieth) sets open the chest,
for such as can sooth hir and all away wrest.
Good husband, preuenting the frailnes of some,
takes part of Gods benefits, as they doo come,
And leaueth to wife and his children the rest,
each one his owne part, as he thinketh it best.
These lessons approoued, if wiselie ye note,
may saue and auantage ye many a grote.
Which if ye can follow, occasion found,
then euerie lesson may saue ye a pound.
[1] Stanzas 2, 3, and 4 are wanting in 1573 and 1577.
[2] coefers. 1577.
[3] St. 14 is not in ed. of 1577.
[4] be ginne. 1577.
[5] compt. 1577.
[6] reachelesse. 1577.
[7] bringing. 1577.
[8] In lieu of last two lines, the edition of 1577 reads:
Tithe duely and truely with harty good will,
that god and his blessing may dwell with thee still.
[9] Stanzas 30 and 31 are wanting in 1573 and 1577.
[10] Stanza 34 is not in 1577.
[11] Stanzas 35 and 36 are not in 1577.
[12] In lieu of last two lines, the edition of 1577 reads--
In substance, although ye have never so much,
delight not in parasites, harlots, and such.
[13] and smell of a begger where ever ye dwell. 1577.
[14] or. 1577.
[15] gether. 1577.
[16] St. 52 is not in 1577; sts. 56, 58, 59 not in 1573 (M.); 56, 58,
59, 60, 61, 62 not in 1577.
11.
¶ _An habitation inforced better late than neuer, vpon these words Sit
downe Robin and rest thee.[E57]
Chap._ 11.
_My friend, if cause doth wrest thee,
Ere follie hath much opprest thee:
Farre from acquaintance kest thee,
Where countrie may digest thee,
Let wood and water request thee,
In good corne soile to nest thee,
Where pasture and meade may brest thee,
And healthsom aire inuest thee.
Though enuie shall detest thee,
Let that no whit molest thee,
Thanke God, that so hath blest thee,
And sit downe Robin & rest thee._
* * * The title in the edition of 1577 reads:
An habitation enforced aduisedly to be followed better late than
never, &c.
12.
[Not in 1577.]
¶ _The fermers dailie diet.
Chap._ 12.
A plot set downe, for fermers quiet,
as time requires, to frame his diet:
With sometime fish, and sometime fast,
that houshold store may longer last.[E58]
[Sidenote: Lent.]
Let Lent well kept offend not thee,
for March and Aprill breeders bee:
Spend herring first, saue saltfish last,
for saltfish is good, when Lent is past.
[Sidenote: Easter.]
When Easter comes, who knowes not than,
that Veale and Bakon is the man:[E59]
And Martilmas beefe[1][E60] doth beare good tack,
when countrie folke doe dainties lack.
[Sidenote: Midsommer.]
[Sidenote: Mihelmas.]
When Mackrell ceaseth from the seas,
John Baptist brings grassebeefe and pease.
Fresh herring plentie, Mihell brings,
with fatted Crones,[2] and such old things.[E61]
[Sidenote: Hallomas.]
[Sidenote: Christmas.]
All Saints doe laie for porke and souse,
for sprats and spurlings for their house.[E62]
At Christmas play and make good cheere,
for Christmas comes but once a yeere.
[Sidenote: A caueat.]
[Sidenote: Fasting.]
Though some then doe, as doe they would,
let thriftie doe, as doe they should.
For causes good, so many waies,
keepe Embrings[E63] wel, and fasting daies:
[Sidenote: Fish daies.]
[Sidenote: A thing needful.]
What lawe commands, we ought to obay,
for Friday, Saturne, and Wednesday.[E64]
The land doth will, the sea doth wish,
spare sometime flesh, and feede of fish.
[Sidenote: The last remedie.]
Where fish is scant, and fruit of trees,
Supplie that want with butter and cheese.
T. Tusser.
[1] "Dry'd in the Chimney as Bacon, and is so called because it was
usual to kill the Beef for this Provision about the Feast of St.
Martin, Nov. 11th."--T.R.(= Tusser Redivivus, here and elsewhere)
[2] "A Crone is a Ewe, whose teeth are so worne down that she can no
longer keep her sheep-walk."--T.R.
13.
[Not in 1577.]
_A description of the properties of windes all the times of the yeere.
Chap._ 13.
[Sidenote: In winter.]
North winds send haile, South winds bring raine,
East winds we bewail, West winds blow amaine:
North east is too cold, South east not too warme,
North west is too bold, South west doth no harme.
[Sidenote: At the spring.]
[Sidenote: Sommer.]
The north is a noyer to grasse of all suites,
The east a destroyer to herbe and all fruites:
The south with his showers refresheth the corne,
The west to all flowers may not be forborne.
[Sidenote: Autumne.]
The West, as a father, all goodnes doth bring,
The East, a forbearer, no manner of thing:
The South, as vnkind, draweth sicknesse too neere,
The North, as a friend, maketh all againe cleere.
[Sidenote: God is the gouerner of winde and weather.]
With temperate winde we be blessed of God,
With tempest we finde we are beat with his rod:
All power we knowe to remaine in his hand,
How euer winde blowe, by sea or by land.
Though windes doe rage, as windes were wood,
And cause spring tydes to raise great flood,
And loftie ships leaue anker in mud,[E65]
Bereafing many of life and of blud;
Yet true it is, as cow chawes cud,
And trees at spring doe yeeld forth bud,
Except winde stands as neuer it stood,
It is an ill winde turnes none to good.[E66]
14.
[Not in 1577.]
¶ _Of the Planets.
Chap._ 14.
As huswiues are teached, in stead of a clock,
how winter nights passeth, by crowing of cock;
So here by the Planets, as far as I dare,
some lessons I leaue for the husbandmans share.
[Sidenote: Of the rising and going down of the sun.]
If day star appeareth, day comfort is ny,
If sunne be at south, it is noone by and by:
If sunne be at westward, it setteth anon,
If sunne be at setting, the day is soone gon.
[Sidenote: Of the Moone changing.]
Moone changed, keepes closet three daies as a Queene,
er she in hir prime will of any be seene:
If great she appereth, it showreth out,
If small she appereth, it signifieth drout.[E67]
At change or at full, come it late or else soone,
maine sea is at highest, at midnight and noone:
But yet in the creekes it is later high flood,
through farnesse of running, by reason as good.
[Sidenote: Of flowing and ebbing to such as be verie sick.]
Tyde flowing is feared, for many a thing,
great danger to such as be sick it doth bring:
Sea eb by long ebbing some respit doth giue,
and sendeth good comfort to such as shal liue.[E68]
15.
¶ _Septembers Abstract.
Chap._ 15.
1[1]
Now enter John,
old fermer is gon.
What champion vseth,
that woodland refuseth.
Good ferme now take,
kéepe still, or forsake.
What helpes to reuiue
the thriuing to thriue.
Plough, fence, & store
aught else before.
By tits and such
few gaineth much.
Horse strong and light
soone charges quite.[2]
Light head and purse,
what lightnes wurse.
Who goeth[3] a borrowing,
goeth a sorrowing.[E69]
Few lends (but fooles)
their working tooles.[4]
Gréene rie haue some,
er Mihelmas come.
Grant soile hir lust,
sowe rie in the dust.
Cleane rie that sowes,
the better crop mowes.
Mix rie aright,
with wheat that is whight.
Sée corne sowen in,
too thick nor too thin.
For want of séede,
land yéeldeth wéede.
With sling or bowe,
kéepe corne from Crowe.
Trench hedge and forrow,
that water may thorow.
Déepe dike saues much,
from drouers and such.
Amend marsh wall,
Crab holes and all.
Geld bulles and rams,
sewe ponds, amend dams.
Sell webster thy wull,
fruite gather, grapes pull.
For fear of drabs,
go gather thy crabs.
Plucke fruite to last,
when Mihell[5] is past.
Forget it not,
fruit brused will rot.
Light ladder and long
doth trée least wrong.
Go gather with skill,
and gather that will.
Driue hiue, good conie,
for waxe and for honie.
No driuing of hiue,
till yéeres past[6] fiue.
Good dwelling giue bée,
or hence goes[7] shée.
Put bore in stie,
for Hallontide nie.
With bore (good Cisse)
let naught be amisse.
Karle hempe, left gréene,
now pluck vp cléene.
Drowne hemp as ye néed,
once had out his séed.
I pray thee (good Kit)
drowne hempe in pit.
Of al the rest,
white hempe is best.
Let skilfull be gotten
least hempe prooue rotten.
Set strawberies, wife,
I loue them for life.
Plant Respe and rose,
and such as those.
Goe gather vp mast,
er[8] time be past.
Mast fats vp swine,
Mast kils vp kine.
Let hogs be roong,
both old and yoong.
No mast vpon oke,
no longer[9] vnyoke.
If hog doe crie,
giue eare and eie.
Hogs haunting corne
may not be borne.
Good neighbour thow
good custome alow,
No scaring with dog,
whilst mast is for hog.
Get home with the brake,
to brue with and bake,
To couer the shed
drie ouer the hed,
To lie vnder cow,
to rot vnder mow,[10]
To serue to burne,
for many a turne.
To sawpit drawe
boord log, to sawe.
Let timber be haile,
least profit doe quaile.
Such boord and pale
is readie sale.
Sawne slab let lie,
for stable and stie,
sawe dust spred thick,
makes alley trick.
Kéepe safe thy fence,
scare breakhedge thence.
A drab and a knaue
will prowle to haue.
Marke winde and moone,
at midnight and noone.
Some rigs thy plow,
some milks thy cow.
Red cur or black,
few prowlers lack.
Some steale, some pilch,
some all away filch,
Mark losses with gréefe,
through prowling théefe.
Thus endeth Septembers abstract, agréeing with Septembers
husbandrie.[11]
¶ Other short remembrances.[12]
[40]
Now friend, as ye wish,
goe seuer thy fish:
When friend shall come,
to be sure of some.
[41]
Thy ponds renew,
put éeles in stew,
To léeue[13] till Lent,
and then to be spent.
[42]
Set priuie or prim,
set boxe like him.
Set Giloflowers[14] all,
that growes on the wall.
[43]
Set herbes some more,
for winter store.
Sowe séedes for pot,
for flowers sowe not.
Here ends Septembers short remembrances.[15]
[1] Stanzas 1 and 2 not in 1577.
[2] quight. 1577.
[3] goes. 1577.
[4] After st. 8, in 1577, follow sts. 36, 37, of August's Abstract.
Many stanzas of Sept. Abst., 1577, occur as Aug. Works after harvest in
1580.
[5] Migchel. 1577.
[6] nere. 1577.
[7] goeth. 1577.
[8] nere. 1577.
[9] lenger. 1577.
[10]
To lie under mow,
to rot under kow. 1577.
[11] This and similar notes under other months do not occur in 1577.
[12] This and similar notes under other months do not occur in 1577.
[13] liue. 1577.
[14] Gelliflowers. 1577.
[15] This and similar notes under other months do not occur in 1577.
16.
¶ _Septembers husbandrie.
Chap._ 15.
September blowe soft,
Till fruite be in loft.
Forgotten, month past,
Doe now at the last.[1]
1[2]
At Mihelmas lightly new fermer comes in,
new husbandrie forceth him new to begin:
Old fermer, still taking the time to him giuen,
makes August to last vntill Mihelmas euen.[E70]
New fermer may enter (as champions say)
on all that is fallow, at Lent ladie day:
In woodland, old fermer to that will not yeeld,
for loosing of pasture, and feede of his feeld.[E71]
[Sidenote: Ferme take or giue over.]
Prouide against Mihelmas,[3] bargaine to make,
for ferme to giue ouer, to keepe or to take:
In dooing of either, let wit beare a stroke,
for buieng or selling of pig in a poke.[E72]
[Sidenote: Twelue good properties.]
Good ferme and well stored, good housing and drie,
good corne and good dairie, good market and nie:
Good shepheard, good tilman, good Jack and good Gil,
makes husband and huswife their cofers[4] to fil.
[Sidenote: Haue euer a good fence.]
Let pasture be stored, and fenced about,
and tillage set forward, as needeth without:
Before ye doe open your purse to begin,
with anything dooing for fancie within.
[Sidenote: Best cattle most profit.]
No storing of pasture with baggedglie tit,
with ragged,[5] with aged, and euil athit:[6]
Let carren and barren be shifted awaie,
for best is the best, whatsoeuer ye paie.
[Sidenote: Strong and light.]
Horse, Oxen, plough, tumbrel, cart, waggon, & waine,
the lighter and stronger, the greater thy gaine.
The soile and the seede, with the sheafe and the purse,
the lighter in substance, for profite the wurse.
[Sidenote: Hate borowing.]
To borow to daie and to-morrow to mis,
for lender and borower, noiance it is:
Then haue of thine owne, without lending vnspilt,
what followeth needfull, here learne if thou wilt.[7]
* * * The stanzas of No. 16 are continued after the following
Digression.
17.
A digression to husbandlie furniture.
[Sidenote: Barne furniture.]
Barne locked, gofe ladder, short pitchforke and long,
flaile, strawforke and rake, with a fan that is strong:
Wing, cartnaue and bushel, peck, strike readie hand,
get casting sholue,[E73] broome, and a sack with a band.
[Sidenote: Stable furniture.]
A stable wel planked, with key and a lock,
walles stronglie wel lyned,[8] to beare off a knock:
A rack and a manger, good litter and haie,
swéete chaffe and some prouender euerie daie.
A pitchfork, a doongfork, seeue, skep[E74] and a bin,
a broome and a paile to put water therein:
A handbarow, wheelebarow, sholue and a spade,
a currie combe, mainecombe, and whip for a Jade.
A buttrice[9] and pincers, a hammer and naile,
an aperne[E75] and siszers for head and for taile:
Hole bridle and saddle, whit lether[E76] and nall,
with collers and harneis, for thiller and all.
A panel and wantey, packsaddle and ped,[E77]
A line to fetch litter, and halters for hed.
With crotchis and pinnes, to hang trinkets theron,
and stable fast chained, that nothing be gon.
[Sidenote: Cart furniture.]
Strong exeltred cart, that is clouted[10] and shod,[11][E78]
cart ladder and wimble, with percer and pod:
Wheele ladder for haruest, light pitchfork and tough,
shaue, whiplash[12] wel knotted, and cartrope ynough.
[Sidenote: A Coeme is halfe a quarter.]
Ten sacks, whereof euerie one holdeth a coome,[E79]
a pulling hooke[E80] handsome, for bushes and broome:
Light tumbrel and doong crone, for easing sir wag,
sholue, pickax, and mattock, with bottle and bag.
[Sidenote: Husbandry tooles.]
A grinstone, a whetstone, a hatchet and bil,
with hamer and english naile, sorted with skil:
A frower of iron, for cleaning of lath,
with roule for a sawpit, good husbandrie hath.
A short saw and long saw, to cut a too logs,
an ax and a nads,[E81] to make troffe for thy hogs:
A Douercourt beetle,[E82] and wedges with steele,
strong leuer to raise vp the block fro the wheele.
[Sidenote: Plough furniture.]
Two ploughs and a plough chein, ij culters, iij shares,
with ground cloutes & side clouts for soile that so tares:
With ox bowes and oxyokes, and other things mo,
for oxteeme and horseteeme, in plough for to go.[E83]
A plough beetle, ploughstaff,[E84] to further the plough,
great clod to a sunder that breaketh so rough;
A sled for a plough, and another for blocks,
for chimney in winter, to burne vp their docks.
Sedge collers[13] for ploughhorse, for lightnes of neck,
good seede and good sower, and also seede peck:
Strong oxen and horses, wel shod and wel clad,
wel meated and vsed, for making thee sad.
A barlie rake toothed, with yron and steele,
like paier of harrowes, and roler doth weele:
A sling for a moether,[E85] a bowe for a boy.
a whip for a carter, is hoigh de la roy.[E86]
A brush sithe and grasse sithe, with rifle to stand,
a cradle[E87] for barlie, with rubstone and sand:
Sharpe sikle and weeding hooke, haie fork and rake,
a meake for the pease, and to swinge vp the brake.
[Sidenote: Haruest tooles.]
15[14]
Short rakes for to gather vp barlie to binde,
and greater to rake vp such leauings behinde:
A rake for to hale vp the fitchis that lie,
a pike for to pike them vp handsom to drie.
16[15]
A skuttle or skreine, to rid soile fro the corne,
and sharing sheares readie for sheepe to be shorne:
A fork and a hooke, to be tampring in claie,[16]
a lath hammer, trowel, a hod, or a traie.
Strong yoke for a hog, with a twicher and rings,
with tar in a tarpot,[E88] for dangerous things:[17]
A sheepe marke, a tar kettle, little or mitch,
two pottles of tar to a pottle of pitch.
Long ladder to hang al along by the wal,
to reach for a neede to the top of thy hal:
Beame, scales, with the weights, that be sealed and true,[E89]
sharp moulspare with barbs, that the mowles do so rue.
19[18]
Sharpe cutting spade, for the deuiding of mow,
with skuppat and skauel, that marsh men alow:
A sickle to cut with, a didall and crome
for draining of ditches, that noies thee at home.
20[19]
A clauestock and rabetstock, carpenters craue,
and seasoned timber, for pinwood to haue:
A Jack for to saw vpon fewell for fier,
for sparing of firewood, and sticks fro the mier.
Soles, fetters, and shackles, with horselock and pad,
a cow house for winter, so meete to be had:
A stie for a bore, and a hogscote for hog,
a roost for thy hennes, and a couch for thy dog.
Here endeth husbandlie furniture.
* * * In the edition of 1577 stanzas 31-46 of Augusts Husbandrie
(_post_) are found here.
[16 _contd._]
[Sidenote: Sowing of rie.]
Thresh seed and to fanning, September doth crie,
get plough to the field, and be sowing of rie:
To harrow the rydgis, er euer ye strike,[E90]
is one peece[20] of husbandrie Suffolk doth like.
Sowe timely thy whitewheat, sowe rie in the dust,
let seede haue his longing, let soile haue hir lust:
Let rie be partaker of Mihelmas spring,
to beare out the hardnes that winter doth bring.
[Sidenote: Myslen.]
11[21]
Some mixeth to miller the rie with the wheat,
Temmes lofe on his table to haue for to eate:
But sowe it not mixed, to growe so on land,
least rie tarie wheat, till it shed as it stand.
If soile doe desire to haue rie with the wheat,
by growing togither, for safetie more great,
Let white wheat be ton, be it deere, be it cheape,
the sooner to ripe, for the sickle to reape.
[Sidenote: Sowing.]
Though beanes be in sowing but scattered in,
yet wheat, rie, and peason, I loue not too thin:
Sowe barlie and dredge,[E91] with a plentifull hand,
least weede, steed of seede, ouer groweth thy land.
[Sidenote: Kéeping of crowes.]
14[22]
No sooner a sowing, but out by and by,
with mother[23] or boy that Alarum can cry:
And let them be armed with sling or with bowe,
to skare away piggen, the rooke and the crowe.[E92]
[Sidenote: Water furrough.]
Seed sowen, draw a forrough, the water to draine,
and dike vp such ends as in harmes[24] doe remaine:
For driuing of cattell or rouing that waie,
which being preuented, ye hinder their praie.
[Sidenote: Amend marsh walles.]
Saint Mihel[25] doth bid thee amend the marsh wal,[E93]
the brecke and the crab hole, the foreland and al:
One noble in season bestowed theron,
may saue thee a hundred er winter be gon.
[Sidenote: Gelding of rams.]
Now geld with the gelder the ram and the bul,
sew ponds, amend dammes, and sel webster thy wul:
Out fruit go and gather, but not in the deaw,
with crab and the wal nut, for feare of a shreaw.
[Sidenote: Gathering of fruit.]
The Moone in the wane, gather fruit for to last,
but winter fruit gather when Mihel is past:
Though michers that loue not to buy nor to craue,
makes some gather sooner, else few for to haue.
[Sidenote: Too early gathering is not best.]
Fruit gathred too timely wil taste of the wood,
wil shrink[26] and be bitter, and seldome prooue good:
So fruit that is shaken, or beat off a tree,
with brusing in falling, soone faultie wil bee.
[Sidenote: Driuing of hiues.]
Now burne vp the bees that ye mind for to driue,
at Midsomer driue them and saue them aliue:
Place hiue in good ayer, set southly and warme,
and take in due season wax, honie, and swarme.
[Sidenote: Preseruing of bées.]
Set hiue on a plank, (not too low by the ground)
where herbe with the flowers may compas it round:
And boordes to defend it from north and north east,
from showers and rubbish, from vermin and beast.
[Sidenote: Stie up the bore.]
At Mihelmas safely go stie vp thy Bore,
least straying abrode, ye doo see him no more:
The sooner the better for Halontide nie,
and better he brawneth if hard he doo lie.[E94]
Shift bore (for il aire) as best ye do thinke,
and twise a day giue him fresh vittle and drinke:
And diligent Cislye, my dayrie good wench,
make cleanly his cabben, for measling[E95] and stench.
[Sidenote: Gathering of winter hempe.]
Now pluck vp thy hempe, and go beat out the seed,
and afterward water it as ye see need:
But not in the riuer where cattle should drinke,
for poisoning them and the people with stinke.[E96]
[Sidenote: Whitest hempe best sold.]
Hempe huswifely vsed lookes cleerely and bright,
and selleth it selfe by the colour so whight:
Some vseth to water it, some do it not,[27]
be skilful in dooing, for feare it do rot.
[Sidenote: Setting of strawberies & roses, &c.]
Wife, into thy garden, and set me a plot,
with strawbery rootes, of the best to be got:
Such growing abroade, among thornes in the wood,
wel chosen and picked prooue excellent good.
[Sidenote: Gooseberies & Respis.]
The Barbery, Respis, and Goosebery too,
looke now to be planted as other things doo:
The Goosebery, Respis, and Roses, al three,
with Strawberies vnder them trimly agree.
[Sidenote: Gathering of mast.]
To gather some mast, it shal stand thee vpon,
with seruant and children, er mast be al gon:
Some left among bushes shal pleasure thy swine,
for feare of a mischiefe keepe acorns fro kine.[E97]
[Sidenote: Rooting of hogs.]
For rooting of pasture ring hog ye had neede,
which being wel ringled the better do feede:
Though yong with their elders wil lightly keepe best,
yet spare not to ringle both great and the rest.
[Sidenote: Yoking of swine.]
Yoke seldom thy swine while the shacktime[28] doth last,
for diuers misfortunes that happen too fast:
Or if ye do fancie whole eare of the hog,
giue eie to il neighbour and eare to his dog.
[Sidenote: Hunting of hogs.]
Keepe hog I aduise thee from medow and corne,
for out aloude crying that ere he was borne:
Such lawles, so haunting, both often and long,
if dog set him chaunting he doth thee no wrong.[E98]
[Sidenote: Ringling of hogs.]
Where loue among neighbors do beare any stroke,
whiles shacktime indureth men vse not to yoke:
Yet surely ringling is needeful and good,
til frost do enuite them to brakes in the wood.
[Sidenote: Carriage of brakes.]
33[29]
Get home with thy brakes, er an sommer be gon,
for teddered cattle to sit there vpon:
To couer thy houel, to brewe and to bake,
to lie in the bottome, where houel ye make.
[Sidenote: Sawe out thy timber.]
Now sawe out thy timber, for boord and for pale,
to haue it vnshaken,[E99] and ready to sale:
Bestowe it and stick it,[30] and lay it aright,
to find it in March, to be ready in plight.
[Sidenote: Slabs of timber.]
Saue slab[31] of thy timber for stable and stie,
for horse and for hog the more clenly to lie:
Saue sawe dust, and brick dust, and ashes so fine,
for alley to walke in, with neighbour of thine.
[Sidenote: Hedge breakers.]
Keepe safely and warely thine vttermost fence,
with ope gap and breake hedge do seldome dispence:
Such runabout prowlers, by night and by day,
see punished iustly for prowling away.
[Sidenote: Learne to knowe Hew prowler.]
At noone if it bloweth, at night if it shine,
out trudgeth Hew make shift, with hooke & with line:[E100]
Whiles Gillet, his blouse, is a milking thy cow,
Sir Hew is a rigging thy gate or the plow.
[Sidenote: Black or red dogs.]
Such walke with a black or a red little cur,
that open wil quickly, if anything stur;
Then squatteth the master, or trudgeth away,
and after dog runneth as fast as he may.
Some prowleth for fewel, and some away rig
fat goose, and the capon, duck, hen, and the pig:
Some prowleth for acornes, to fat vp their swine,
for corne and for apples, and al that is thine.
Thus endeth Septembers husbandrie.[32]
* * * Many stanzas do not occur or are not in the same order in 1577.
[1] In 1577 these and similar couplets at the beginning of each month's
_Husbandrie_, precede the month's _Abstract_ instead.
[2] Sts. 1 and 2 not in 1577.
[3] Mighelmas. 1577.
[4] coefers. 1577.
[5] rakged. 1577.
[6] at hyt. 1577.
[7] Or borow with sorow as long as thou wilt. 1577.
[8] liened. 1577.
[9] To pare horse's hoofs with.-T.R.
[10] "Clouting is arming the Axle-Tree with Iron plates."--T.R.
[11] "Arming the Fellowes with Iron Strakes, or a Tire as some call
it."--T.R. Strakes are segments of a tire.
[12] "Of a tough piece of Whitleather."--T.R.
[13] "Lightest and coolest, but indeed not so comly as those of
Wadmus."--T.R.
[14] St. 15 not in 1577, but as follows:--
Rakes also for barley, long toothed in bed,
and greater like toothed for barley so shed.
and first couplet of st. 16.
[15] St. 16 not thus in 1577; see note above, and next note.
[16] In 1577 the second couplet of st. 16 makes a stanza with the
following:
Strong fetters and shakles, with horslock and pad;
Strong soles, and such other thinges, meete to be had.
[17]
Hog yokes, and a twicher, and ringes for a hog,
with tar in a pot, for the byeting of dog. 1577.
[18] St. 19 not in 1577.
[19] St. 20 not in 1577.
[20] This point of good husbandry, etc. 1577.
[21] St. 11 not in 1577.
[22] Sts. 14 and 15 not in 1577, but nine stanzas which do not occur
here.
[23] Cf. _ante_, ch. 17, st. 13 and note E85.
[24] Cf. _post_, ch. 19, st. 6.
[25] Mighel, here and in st. 18. 1577.
[26] "If Fruit stand too long it will be mealy, which is worse than
shrively, for now most Gentlemen chuse the shriveled Apple."--T.R.
[27] "Ther is a Water-retting and a Dew-retting, which last is done on
a good Rawing, or aftermath of a Meadow Water."--T.R.
[28] "After Harvest."--T.R.
[29] This is placed before st. 9 in 1577.
[30] "Laying the Boards handsomely one upon another with sticks
between."--T.R.
[31] The outermost piece.
[32] Cf. note 12, p. 33.
18.
¶ _Octobers abstract.
Chap._ 16.
Lay drie vp and round,
for barlie thy ground.
Too late doth kill,
too soone is as ill.
Maides little and great,
pick cleane séede wheat.
Good ground doth craue
choice séede to haue.
Flaies[E101] lustily thwack,
least plough séede lack.
4[1]
Séede first go fetch,
for edish or etch,
Soile perfectly knowe,
er edish ye sowe.
White wheat, if ye please,
sowe now vpon pease.
Sowe first the best,
and then the rest.
6[2]
Who soweth in raine,
hath wéed to his paine.
But worse shall he spéed,
that soweth ill séed.
Now, better than later,
draw furrow for water.
Kéepe crowes, good sonne,
sée fencing[3] be donne.
8[4]
Each soile no vaine
for euerie graine.
Though soile be but bad,
some corne may be had.
Naught proue, naught craue,
naught venter, naught haue.
One crop and away,
some countrie may say.
All grauell and sand,
is not the best land.
A rottenly mould
is land woorth gould.
Why wheat is smitten
good lesson is written.
The iudgement of some
how thistles doe come.
A iudgement right,
of land in plight.
Land, all forlorne,
not good for corne.
Land barren doth beare
small strawe, short eare.
Here maist thou réede
for soile what séede.
Tis tride ery hower,
best graine most flower.
Grosse corne much bran
the baker doth ban.
19[5]
What croppers bée
here learne to sée.
Few after crop much,
but noddies and such.
Som woodland may crake,
thrée crops he may take.
First barlie, then pease,
then wheat, if ye please.
Two crops and away,
must champion say.
24[6]
Where barlie did growe,
Laie[7] wheat to sowe.
Yet better I thinke,
sowe pease after drinke.
And then, if ye please,
sowe wheat after pease.
What champion knowes
that custome showes.
First barlie er rie,
then pease by and by.
Then fallow for wheat,
is husbandrie great.
A remedie sent,
where pease lack vent.
Fat peasefed swine
for drouer is fine.
Each diuers soile
hath diuers toile.
Some countries vse
that some refuse.
For wheat ill land,
where water doth stand.
Sowe pease or dredge
belowe in that redge.
Sowe acornes to prooue
that timber doe looue.
Sowe hastings[E102] now,
if land[8] it alow.
Learne soone to get
a good quickset.
For feare of the wurst
make fat away furst.
Fat that no more
ye kéepe for store.
Hide carren in graue,
lesse noiance to haue.
Hog measeled kill,
for flemming that will.
38[9]
With peasebolt and brake
some brew and bake.
Old corne[10] worth gold,
so kept as it shold.
Much profit is rept,
by sloes well kept.
Kéepe sloes vpon bow,
for flixe of thy cow.
Of vergis be sure,
poore cattel to cure.
Thus endeth Octobers abstract, agréeing with Octobers husbandrie.
¶ Other short remembrances.[11]
[43]
Cisse, haue an eie
to bore in the stie.
By malt ill kept,
small profit is rept.
[44]
Friend, ringle thy hog,
for feare of a dog.
Rie straw up stack,
least Thacker doe lack.
[45]
Wheat straw drie saue,
for cattell to haue.
Wheat chaffe lay vp drie,
in safetie to lie.
[46]
Make handsome a bin,
for chaffe to lie in.
[47]
(Séede thresht) thou shalt
thresh barlie to malt.
Cut bushes to hedge,
fence medow and redge.
[48]
Stamp crabs that may,
for rotting away.
Make vergis and perie,[E103]
sowe kirnell and berie.
[49]
Now gather vp fruite,
of euerie suite.
Marsh wall too slight,
strength now, or god night.
[50][12]
Mend wals of mud,
for now it is good.
Where soile is of sand,
quick set out of hand.
[51]
To plots not full
ad bremble and hull.
For set no bar
whilst month hath an R.[E104]
Like note thou shalt
for making of malt.
Brew now to last
till winter be past.
Here ends Octobers short remembrances.[13]
[1] 1577 inserts--
Plie sowing a pace,
in euery place.
[2] St. 6 is not in 1577.
[3] furrowing. 1577.
[4] Sts. 8-30 do not occur here in 1577; but sts. 32-37 follow.
[5] Sts. 19 and 20 are in Septembers Abstract in 1577.
[6] In Septembers Abstract in 1577.
[7] strike. 1577.
[8] ground. 1577.
[9] In 1577, sts. 38 to the end are much transposed.
[10] graine. 1577.
[11] Cf. note 12, p. 33.
[12] First couplet of st. 50 not in 1577.
[13] Cf. note 12, p. 33.
19.
¶ _Octobers husbandrie.
Chap._ 17.
October good blast,
To blowe the hog mast.
Forgotten month past,
Doe now at the last.
[Sidenote: Laie vp barlie land.]
Now lay vp[E105] thy barley land, drie as ye can
when euer ye sowe it so looke for it than:
Get daily aforehand, be neuer behinde;
least winter preuenting do alter thy minde.
Who laieth vp fallow[E106] too soone or too wet,
with noiances many doth barley beset.
For weede and the water so soketh and sucks,
that goodnes from either it vtterly plucks.
[Sidenote: Wheat sowing.]
Greene rie in September when timely thou hast,
October for wheat sowing calleth as fast.
If weather will suffer, this counsell I giue,
Leaue sowing of wheat before Hallomas eue.
[Sidenote: Sowe edish betimes.]
Where wheat vpon edish ye mind to bestowe,
let that be the first of the wheat ye do sowe:
He seemeth to hart it and comfort to bring,
that giueth it comfort of Mihelmas spring.
[Sidenote: Best wheat first sowen.]
White wheat vpon peaseetch doth grow as he wold,
but fallow is best, if we did as we shold:[1]
Yet where, how, and when, ye entend to begin,
let euer the finest be first sowen in.[2]
6[3]
Who soweth in raine, he shall reape it with teares,
who soweth in harmes,[4] he is euer in feares,
Who soweth ill seede or defraudeth his land,
hath eie sore abroode, with a coresie at hand.
7[5]
Seede husbandly sowen, water furrow[6] thy ground,
that raine when it commeth may run away round,
Then stir about Nicoll, with arrow and bowe,
take penie for killing of euerie crowe.
[Not in 1577.]
A digression to the usage of diuers countries, concerning Tillage.
Each soile hath no liking of euerie graine,
nor barlie and wheat is for euerie vaine:
Yet knowe I no countrie so barren of soile
but some kind of corne may be gotten with toile.
In Brantham,[E107] where rie but no barlie did growe,
good barlie I had, as a meany did knowe:
Five seame of an aker I truely was paid,
for thirtie lode muck of each aker so laid.
In Suffolke againe, where as wheat neuer grew,
good husbandrie vsed good wheat land I knew:
This Prouerbe experience long ago gaue,
that nothing who practiseth nothing shall haue.
As grauell and sand is for rie and not wheat,
(or yeeldeth hir burden to tone the more great,)
So peason and barlie delight not in sand,
but rather in claie or in rottener land.
Wheat somtime is steelie or burnt as it growes,
for pride[7] or for pouertie practise so knowes.
Too lustie of courage for wheat doth not well,
nor after sir peeler he looueth to dwell.[E108]
Much wetnes, hog rooting, and land out of hart,
makes thistles a number foorthwith to vpstart.
If thistles so growing prooue lustie and long,
it signifieth land to be hartie and strong.
As land full of tilth and in hartie good plight,
yeelds blade to a length and encreaseth in might,
So crop vpon crop, vpon whose courage we doubt,
yeelds blade for a brag, but it holdeth not out.
The straw and the eare to haue bignes and length,
betokeneth land to be good and in strength.
If eare be but short, and the strawe be but small,
it signifieth barenes and barren withall.
White wheat or else red, red riuet or whight,
far passeth all other, for land that is light.
White pollard or red, that so richly is set,
for land that is heauie is best ye can get.
Maine wheat that is mixed with white and with red
is next to the best in the market mans hed:
So Turkey or Purkey wheat[E109] many doe loue,
because it is flourie, as others aboue.
Graie wheat is the grosest, yet good for the clay,
though woorst for the market, as fermer may say.
Much like vnto rie be his properties found,
coorse flower, much bran, and a peeler of ground.
Otes, rie, or else barlie, and wheat that is gray,
brings land out of comfort, and soone to decay:
One after another, no comfort betweene,
is crop vpon crop, as will quickly be seene.
[Sidenote: Crop vpon crop.]
Still crop vpon crop many farmers do take,
and reape little profit for greedines sake.
Though breadcorne & drinkcorn[E110] such croppers do stand:
count peason or brank, as a comfort to land.
Good land that is seuerall, crops may haue three,
in champion countrie it may not so bee:
Ton taketh his season, as commoners may,
the tother with reason may otherwise say.
Some vseth at first a good fallow to make,
to sowe thereon barlie, the better to take.
Next that to sowe pease, and of that to sowe wheat,
then fallow againe, or lie lay for thy neat.
First rie, and then barlie, the champion saies,
or wheat before barlie be champion waies:
But drinke before bread corne with Middlesex men,
then lay on more compas, and fallow agen.
Where barlie ye sowe, after rie or else wheat,
if land be vnlustie,[8] the crop is not great,
So lose ye your cost, to your coresie and smart,
and land (ouerburdened) is cleane out of hart.
Exceptions take of the champion land,
from lieng alonge from that at thy hand.
(Just by) ye may comfort with compas at will,
far off ye must comfort with fauor and skill.
Where rie or else wheat either barlie ye sowe,
let codware be next, therevpon for to growe:
Thus hauing two crops, whereof codware is ton,
thou hast the lesse neede, to lay cost therevpon.
Some far fro the market delight not in pease,
for that ery chapman they seeme not to please.
If vent of the market place serue thee not well,
set hogs vp a fatting, to drouer to sell.
Two crops of a fallow enricheth the plough,
though tone be of pease, it is land good ynough:
One crop and a fallow some soile will abide,
where if ye go furder lay profit aside.
Where peason ye had and a fallow thereon,
sowe wheat ye may well without doong therevpon:
New broken vpland, or with water opprest,
or ouer much doonged, for wheat is not best.
Where water all winter annoieth too much,
bestowe not thy wheat vpon land that is such:
But rather sowe otes, or else bullimong[E111] there,
gray peason, or runciuals, fitches, or tere.
[Sidenote: Sowing of acorns.]
Sowe acornes ye owners, that timber doe looue,
sowe hawe and rie with them the better to prooue;
If cattel or cunnie may enter to crop,
yong oke is in daunger of loosing his top.
[Sidenote: Sowing of Hastings or fullams.]
Who pescods delighteth to haue with the furst,
if now he do sowe them, I thinke it not wurst.
The greener thy peason and warmer the roome,
more lusty the layer, more plenty they come.
Go plow vp or delue vp, aduised with skill,
the bredth of a ridge, and in length as you will.
Where speedy quickset for a fence ye wil drawe,
to sowe in the seede of the bremble and hawe.[E112]
[Sidenote: A disease in fat hogs.]
Through plenty of acornes, the porkling to fat,
not taken in season, may perish by that,
If ratling or swelling get once to the throte,
thou loosest thy porkling, a crowne to a grote.[E113]
[Sidenote: Not to fat for rearing.]
What euer thing fat is, againe if it fall,
thou ventrest the thing and the fatnes withall,
The fatter the better, to sell or to kil,
but not to continue, make proofe if ye wil.
[Sidenote: Burieng of dead cattell.]
What euer thing dieth, go burie or burne,
for tainting of ground, or a woorser il turne.
Such pestilent smell of a carrenly thing,
to cattle and people great peril may bring.
[Sidenote: Measeled hogs.]
Thy measeled bacon, hog, sow, or thy bore,
shut vp for to heale, for infecting thy store:
Or kill it for bacon, or sowce it to sell,
for Flemming, that loues it so deintily well.[E114]
[Sidenote: Strawwisps and peasbolts.]
With strawisp and peasebolt, with ferne and the brake,
for sparing of fewel, some brewe and do bake,
And heateth their copper, for seething of graines:
good seruant rewarded, refuseth no paines.[E115]
[Sidenote: Olde wheat better than new.]
Good breadcorne and drinkcorne, full xx weekes kept,
is better then new, that at harvest is rept:
But foisty the breadcorne and bowd eaten malt,[E116]
for health or for profit, find noysome thou shalt.
40[9]
By thend of October, go gather vp sloes,
haue thou in a readines plentie of thoes,
And keepe them in bedstraw, or still on the bow,
to staie both the flixe of thyselfe and thy cow.
[Sidenote: A medicin for the cow flixe.]
Seeith water and plump therein plenty of sloes,
mix chalke[10] that is dried in powder with thoes
Which so, if ye giue, with the water and chalke,
thou makest the laxe fro thy cow away walke.[E117]
42[11]
Be sure of vergis (a gallond at least)
so good for the kitchen, so needfull for beast,
It helpeth thy cattel, so feeble and faint,
if timely such cattle with it thou acquaint.
Thus endeth Octobers husbandrie.
[1]
White wheat upon pease etch is willing to grow:
though best upon fallow as many do knowe. 1577.
[2] After st. 5, 1577 has st. 31 _post_.
[3] St. 6 not in 1577.
[4] "In harms or harms way, whether of Roads, ill Neighbours, Torrents
of Water, Conies, or other Vermin."--T.R. Cf. _ante_, ch. 16, st. 15.
[5] In Septembers Husbandry, 1577.
[6] "Furrows drawn cross the Ridges in the lowest part of the
Ground."--T.R.
[7] "or too much Dung."--T.R.
[8] "There is a sort of Barley, called Sprat Barley, or Battledore
Barley, that will grow very well on lusty land. "--T.R.
[9] Stanza 40 is not in 1577.
[10] chawlk. 1577.
[11] Stanza 42 is not in 1577.
20.
¶ _Nouembers abstract.
Chap._ 18
Let hog once fat,
loose nothing of that.
When mast is gon,
hog falleth anon,
Still fat vp some,
till Shroftide come.
Now porke and souse,
beares tack in house.
Put barlie to malting,
lay flitches a salting.
Through follie too beastlie[E118]
much bacon is reastie.[1]
Some winnow, some fan,
some cast that can.[2]
In casting prouide,
for séede lay aside.
Thresh barlie thou shalt,
for chapman to malt.
Else thresh no more
but for thy store.
5[3]
Till March thresh wheat,
but as ye doo eat,
Least baker forsake it
if foystines take it.
No chaffe in bin,
makes horse looke thin.
7[4]
Sowe hastings now,
that hastings alow.
They buie it full déere,
in winter that réere.
Few fowles, lesse swine,
rere now, friend mine.
What losse, what sturs,
through rauening curs.
Make Martilmas béefe,
déere meate is a théefe.
Set garlike and pease,
saint Edmond to please.
When raine takes place,
to threshing apace.
Mad braine, too rough,
marres all at plough.
With flaile and whips,
fat hen short skips.
Some threshing by taske,
will steale and not aske:
Such thresher at night
walkes seldom home light.
Some corne away lag
in bottle and bag.
Some steales, for a iest,
egges out of the nest.
Lay stouer[E119] vp drie
in order to lie.
Poore bullock[5] doth craue
fresh straw to haue.
Make wéekly vp flower,
though threshers do lower:
Lay graine in loft
and turne it oft.
For muck, regard,
make cleane foule yard.
Lay straw to rot,
in watrie plot.
Hedlond vp plow,
for compas ynow.
For herbes good store,
trench garden more.
At midnight trie
foule priuies to fie.
Rid chimney of soot,
from top to the foot.
In stable, put now
thy horses for plow.
Good horsekeeper will
laie muck vpon hill.
25[6]
Cut molehils that stand
so thick vpon land.
Thus endeth Novembers abstract, agréeing with Nouembers husbandrie.
¶ Other short remembrances.
Get pole, boy mine,
beate hawes to swine.
Driue hog to the wood,
brake rootes be good.
For mischiefe that falles,
looke well to marsh walles.
Drie laier get neate,
and plentie of meate.
Curst cattel that nurteth,
poore wennel soon hurteth.
Good neighbour mine,
ring well thy swine.
Such winter may serue,
hog ringled[7] will sterue.
In frost kéepe dog
from hunting of hog.
Here ends Nouembers short remembrances.
[1] resty. 1577
[2] 1577 reads--
Let husbandly man
make clene as he can.
[3] Not in 1577.
[4] Stanzas 7-10 are not in 1577.
[5] kow.
[6] St. 25 is not in 1577.
[7] ringd. 1577.
21.
¶ _Nouembers husbandrie.
Chap._ 19.
Nouember take flaile,
Let ship no more saile.
Forgotten month past,
Doe now at the last.
[Sidenote: Slaughter time.]
At Hallontide, slaughter time entereth in,
and then doth the husbandmans feasting begin
From thence vnto shroftide kill now and then some,
their offal for houshold the better wil come.[E120]
[Sidenote: Dredge is otes and barlie.]
Thy dredge and thy barley go thresh out to malt,
let malster be cunning, else lose it thou shalt:
Thencrease of a seame is a bushel for store,
bad else is the barley, or huswife much more.
[Sidenote: Winnowing, fanning, and casting.]
Some vseth to winnow,[1] some vseth to fan,
some vseth to cast it as cleane as they can:
For seede goe and cast it, for malting not so,
but get out the cockle,[2] and then let it go.[E121]
[Sidenote: Threshing of barlie.]
Thresh barlie as yet but as neede shal require,
fresh threshed for stoouer thy cattel desire:
And therefore that threshing forbeare as ye may,
till Candelmas comming, for sparing of hay.
Such wheat as ye keepe for the baker to buie,
vnthreshed till March in the sheafe let it lie,
Least foistnes take it if sooner yee thresh it,
although by oft turning ye seeme to refresh it.[E122]
[Sidenote: Chaffe of corne.]
Saue chaffe of the barlie, of wheate, and of rie,
from feathers and foistines, where it doth lie,
Which mixed with corne, being sifted of dust,
go giue to thy cattel, when serue them ye must.
7[3]
Greene peason or hastings at Hallontide sowe,
in hartie good soile he requireth to growe:
Graie peason or runciuals cheerely to stand,
at Candlemas sowe, with a plentifull hand.
Leaue latewardly rering, keepe now no more swine,
but such as thou maist, with the offal of thine:
Except ye haue wherewith to fat them away,
the fewer thou keepest, keepe better yee may.
To rere vp much pultrie, and want the barne doore,
is naught for the pulter and woorse for the poore.
So, now to keepe hogs and to sterue them for meate,
is as to keepe dogs for to bawle in the streate.
As cat a good mouser is needfull in house,
because for hir commons she killeth the mouse,
So rauening curres, as a meany doo keepe,
makes master want meat, and his dog to kill sheepe.[E123]
[Sidenote: Martilmas beefe.]
(For Easter) at Martilmas hang vp a beefe,
for stalfed and pease fed plaie pickpurse the theefe:
With that and the like, er an grasse biefe come in,
thy folke shal looke cheerelie when others looke thin.
[Sidenote: ¶ Set garlike and beanes.]
Set garlike and beanes, at S. Edmond[4] the king,
the moone in the wane, thereon hangeth a thing:[E124]
Thencrease of a pottle (well prooued of some)
shal pleasure thy houshold er peskod time come.
[Sidenote: Threshing.]
When raine is a let to thy dooings abrode,
set threshers a threshing to laie on good lode:
Thresh cleane ye must bid them, though lesser they yarn,
and looking to thriue, haue an eie to thy barne.
[Sidenote: Cattle beaters.]
Take heede to thy man in his furie and heate,
with ploughstaff and whipstock, for maiming thy neate:
To thresher for hurting of cow with his flaile,
or making thy hen to plaie tapple vp taile.[E125]
[Sidenote: Corne stealers.]
Some pilfering thresher will walke with a staffe,
will carrie home corne as it is in the chaffe,
And some in his bottle of leather so great[E126]
will carry home daily both barlie and wheat.
[Sidenote: Kéepe dry thy straw.]
If houseroome will serue thee, lay stouer vp drie,
and euerie sort by it selfe for to lie.
Or stack it for litter, if roome be too poore,
and thatch out the residue noieng thy doore.[5]
[Sidenote: Euery wéeke rid thy barne flower.]
Cause weekly thy thresher to make vp his flower,
though slothfull and pilferer thereat doo lower:
Take tub for a season, take sack for a shift,
yet garner for graine is the better for thrift.
All maner of strawe that is scattered in yard,
good husbandlie husbands haue daily regard,
In pit full of water the same to bestowe,
where lieng to rot, thereof profit may growe.
[Sidenote: Digging of hedlonds.]
Now plough vp thy hedlond,[6] or delue it with spade,
where otherwise profit but little is made:
And cast it vp high, vpon hillocks to stand,
that winter may rot it, to compas thy land.
[Sidenote: Trenching of garden.]
If garden requier it, now trench it ye may,
one trench not a yard from another go lay:
Which being well filled with muck by and by,
go couer with mould for a season to ly.
[Sidenote: Clensing of priuies.]
Foule priuies are now to be clensed and fide,
let night be appointed such baggage to hide:
Which buried in garden, in trenches alowe,
shall make very many things better to growe.
[Sidenote: Sootie chimneyes.]
The chimney all sootie would now be made cleene,
for feare of mischances, too oftentimes seene:
Old chimney and sootie, if fier once take,
by burning and breaking, soone mischeefe may make.[E127]
[Sidenote: Put horse into stable.]
When ploughing is ended, and pasture not great,
then stable thy horses, and tend them with meat:
Let season be drie when ye take them to house,
for danger of nittes, or for feare of a louse.[E128]
[Sidenote: Sauing of doong.]
Lay compas vp handsomly, round on a hill,
to walke in thy yard at thy pleasure and will,
More compas it maketh and handsom the plot,
if horsekeeper daily forgetteth it not.
25[7]
Make hillocks of molehils, in field thorough out,
and so to remaine, till the yeere go about.
Make also the like whereas plots be too hie,
all winter a rotting for compas to lie.
Thus endeth Nouembers husbandrie.
[1] winnew. 1557.
[2] "If the Cockle be left in, it will work, and some say make the
Drink the stronger."--T.R.
[3] Stanzas 7-10 are not in 1577.
[4] 20th November.
[5] "The rest may lie in the open Yard, for the Cattle to tread into
Dung, which is the practice now a days, so that our Farmers are not so
afraid of noying their Doors it seems as formerly, and that not without
good reason."--T.R.
[6] T.R. thinks that here is meant "such Ground in Common Field-land,
which the whole Shot (or parcel of Land belonging to many Men against
which it lies) turn upon."
[7] St. 25 is not in 1577.
22.
¶ _Decembers abstract.
Chap._ 20.
No season to hedge,
get béetle and wedge.
Cleaue logs now all,
for kitchen and hall.
Dull working tooles
soone courage cooles.
Leaue off tittle tattle,
and looke to thy cattle.
Serue yoong poore elues
alone by themselues.
Warme barth for neate,
woorth halfe their meate.
The elder that nurteth
the yonger soone hurteth.
Howse cow that is old,
while winter doth hold.
Out once in a day,
to drinke and to play.
Get trustie to serue,
least cattle doo sterue.
And such as in déede
may helpe at a néede.
Obserue this law,
in seruing out straw.
In walking about,
good forke spie out.
At full and at change,
spring tides are strange.
If doubt ye fray,
driue cattle away.
Dank ling forgot
will quickly rot.
Here learne and trie
to turne it and drie.
Now stocks remooue,
that Orchards looue.
Set stock to growe
too thick nor too lowe.
Set now, as they com,
both cherie[1] and plom.
Shéepe, hog, and ill beast,
bids stock to ill feast.[2]
At Christmas is good
to let thy horse blood.
Mark here what rable
of euils in stable.
Mixe well (old gaffe)
horse corne with chaffe.
Let Jack nor Gill
fetch corne at will.
19[3]
Some countries gift
to make hard shift.
Some cattle well fare
with fitches and tare.
Fitches and tares
be Norfolke wares.
Tares threshed with skill
bestowe as yée will.
Hide strawberies, wife,
to saue their life.
Knot, border, and all,
now couer ye shall.
Helpe bées, sweet conie,
with licour and honie.
Get campers a ball,
to campe therewithall.
Thus endeth Decembers abstract, agréeing with Decembers husbandrie.
[25]
Let Christmas spie
yard cleane to lie.
No labour, no sweate,
go labour for heate.
Féede dooues, but kill not,
if stroy them ye will not.
Fat hog or ye kill it,
or else ye doo spill it.
[26]
Put oxe in stall,
er oxe doo fall.
Who séetheth hir graines,
hath profit for paines.
Rid garden of mallow,
plant willow and sallow.
[27]
Let bore life render,
sée brawne sod tender,
For wife, fruit bie,
for Christmas pie.
Ill bread and ill drinke,
makes many ill thinke.
Both meate and cost
ill dressed halfe lost.
[28]
Who hath wherewithall,
may chéere when he shall:
But charged man,
must chéere as he can.
Here ends Decembers short remembrances.
[1] chearrey. 1577.
[2] St. 15.
Wind north, north east
bids stock to il feast. 1577.
[3] Sts. 19 and 20 are not in 1573 (M.); sts. 19, 20, and 24 are not in
1577.
23.
¶ _Decembers husbandrie.
Chap._ 21.
O dirtie December
For Christmas remember.
Forgotten month past,
Doe now at the last.
[Sidenote: Béetle and wedges.]
When frost will not suffer to dike and to hedge,
then get thee a heat with thy beetle and wedge
Once Hallomas come, and a fire in the hall,
such sliuers doo well for to lie by the wall.
[Sidenote: Grinding stone and whetston.]
Get grindstone and whetstone, for toole that is dull,
or often be letted and freat bellie full.
A wheele barrow also be readie to haue
at hand of thy seruant, thy compas to saue.
[Sidenote: Seruing of cattle.]
Giue cattle their fodder in plot drie and warme,
and count them for miring or other like harme.
Yoong colts with thy wennels together go serue,
least lurched by others they happen to sterue.[1]
[Sidenote: Woodland countrie.]
The rack is commended for sauing of doong,
so set as the old cannot mischiefe the yoong:[E129]
In tempest (the wind being northly or east)
warme barth[E130] vnder hedge is a sucker[2] to beast.
[Sidenote: Housing of cattel.]
[Sidenote: Champion.]
The housing of cattel while winter doth hold,
is good for all such as are feeble and old:
It saueth much compas, and many a sleepe,
and spareth the pasture for walke of thy sheepe.[3]
[Sidenote: Champion.]
For charges so little much quiet is won,
if strongly and handsomly al thing be don:
But vse to vntackle them once in a day,
to rub and to lick them, to drink and to play.
[Sidenote: Ordering of cattel.]
Get trustie to tend them, not lubberlie squire,
that all the day long hath his nose at the fire.[E131]
Nor trust vnto children poore cattel to feede,
but such as be able to helpe at a neede.
Serue riestraw out first, then wheatstraw and pease,
then otestraw and barlie, then hay if ye please:
But serue them with hay while the straw stouer last,
then loue they no straw, they had rather to fast.
[Sidenote: Forkes and yokes.]
Yokes, forks, and such other, let bailie spie out,
and gather the same as he walketh about.
And after at leasure let this be his hier,
to beath[E132] them and trim them at home by the fier.
[Sidenote: Going of cattel in marshes.]
As well at the full of the moone as the change,
sea rages in winter be sodainly strange.
Then looke to thy marshes, if doubt be to fray,
for feare of (_ne forte_) haue cattel away.
[Sidenote: Looke to thy ling and saltfish.]
Both saltfish and lingfish (if any ye haue)
through shifting and drieng from rotting go saue:
Least winter with moistnes doo make it relent,
and put it in hazard before[4] it be spent.
[Sidenote: How to vse ling and haberden.]
Broome fagot is best to drie haberden on,
lay boord vpon ladder if fagots be gon.
For breaking (in turning) haue verie good eie,
and blame not the wind, so the weather be drie.
[Sidenote: Remoouing of trées.]
Good fruit and good plentie doth well in the loft,
then make thee an orchard and cherish it oft:
For plant or for stock laie aforehand to cast,
but set or remooue it er Christmas be past.
[Sidenote: An orchard point.]
Set one fro other full fortie foote wide,
to stand as he stood is a part of his pride.
More faier, more woorthie, of cost to remooue,
more steadie ye set it, more likely to prooue.
[Sidenote: Orchard and hopyard.]
To teach and vnteach in a schoole is vnmeete,
to doe and vndoe to the purse is vnsweete.
Then orchard or hopyard, so trimmed with cost,
should not through follie be spoiled and lost.
[Sidenote: Letting horse blood.]
Er Christmas be passed let horse be let blood,
for many a purpose it doth them much good.
The daie of S. Stephen old fathers did vse:
if that doe mislike thee some other daie chuse.
[Sidenote: Bréeding of the bots.]
Looke wel to thy horses in stable thou must,
that haie be not foistie, nor chaffe ful of dust:
Nor stone in their prouender, feather, nor clots,
nor fed with greene peason, for breeding of bots.
[Sidenote: Hog and hennes meate.]
Some horsekeeper lasheth out prouender so,
some Gillian spendal so often doth go.
For hogs meat and hens meat, for that and for this,
that corne loft is empted er chapman hath his.
19[5]
Some countries are pinched of medow for hay,
yet ease it with fitchis as well as they may.
Which inned and threshed and husbandlie dight,
keepes laboring cattle in verie good plight.
In threshing out fitchis one point I will shew,
first thresh out for seede of the fitchis a few:
Thresh few fro thy plowhorse, thresh cleane for the cow,
this order in Norfolke good husbands alow.
[Sidenote: ¶ Strawberies.]
If frost doe continue, take this for a lawe,
the strawberies looke to be couered with strawe.
Laid ouerly trim vpon crotchis and bows,
and after vncouered as weather allows.
[Sidenote: ¶ Gilleflowers.]
The gilleflower also, the skilful doe knowe,
doe looke to be couered, in frost and in snowe.
The knot, and the border, and rosemarie gaie,
do craue the like succour for dieng awaie.
[Sidenote: ¶ How to preserue bees.]
Go looke to thy bees, if the hiue be too light,
set water and honie, with rosemarie dight.
Which set in a dish ful of sticks in the hiue,
from danger of famine[6] yee saue them aliue.
24[7]
In medow or pasture (to growe the more fine)
let campers be camping[8][E133] in any of thine:
Which if ye doe suffer when lowe is the spring,
you gaine to your selfe a commodious thing.
Thus endeth Decembers husbandrie.
[1] "The old will be apt to hunge or gore the younger."--T.R.
[2] succor. 1620.
[3] and trimly refresheth the walk of the sheepe. 1577.
[4] er ere. 1577.
[5] Sts. 19 and 20 are not in 1577.
[6] from famen and daunger. 1577.
[7] St. 24 is not in 1577.
[8] "Football playing, at which they are very dextrous in
Norfolk."--T.R.
24.
¶ _A digression to hospitalitie.
Chap._ 22.[1]
Leaue husbandrie sleeping a while ye must doo,
to learne of housekeeping a lesson or twoo.
What euer is sent thee by trauell and paine,
a time there is lent thee to rendrit againe.
Although ye defend it, vnspent for to bee,
another shall spend it, no thanke vnto thee.
How euer we clime, to accomplish the mind,
we haue but a time thereof profit to find.
[1] Chap. 22 is wanting in 1573 (M). In 1577 it is printed in twice the
number of lines.
25.
¶ _A description of time, and the yeare.
Chap._ 23.
Of God to thy dooings a time there is sent,
which endeth with time that in dooing is spent.
For time is it selfe but a time for a time,
forgotten ful soone, as the tune of a chime.
[Sidenote: Spring.]
[Sidenote: Sommer.]
[Sidenote: Haruest.]
[Sidenote: Winter.]
In Spring time we reare, we doo sowe, and we plant,
in Sommer get vittels, least after we want.
In Haruest we carie in corne and the fruit,
in Winter to spend as we neede of ech suit.
[Sidenote: Childhood.]
[Sidenote: Youth.]
[Sidenote: Manhood.]
[Sidenote: Age.]
The yeere I compare, as I find for a truth,
the Spring vnto childhood, the Sommer to youth,
The Haruest to manhood, the Winter to age:
all quickly forgot as a play on a stage.[E134]
Time past is forgotten, er men be aware,
time present is thought on with woonderfull care,
Time comming is feared, and therefore we saue,
yet oft er it come, we be gone to the graue.
26.
¶ _A description of life and riches.
Chap._ 24.
Who liuing but daily discerne it he may,
how life as a shadow doth vanish away;
And nothing to count on so suer to trust
as suer of death and to turne into dust.[E135]
The lands and the riches that here we possesse
be none of our owne, if a God we professe,
But lent vs of him, as his talent of gold,
which being demanded, who can it withhold?
[Sidenote: Atrop, or death.]
God maketh no writing that iustly doth say
how long we shall haue it, a yeere or a day;
But leaue it we must (how soeuer we leeue)
when Atrop[E136] shall pluck vs from hence by the sleeue.
To death we must stoupe, be we high, be we lowe,
but how and how sodenly, few be that knowe:
What carie we then, but a sheete to the graue,
to couer this carkas, of all that we haue?
27.
¶ _A description of housekeeping.
Chap._ 25.
What then of this talent, while here we remaine,
to studie to yeeld it to God with a gaine?
And that shall we doo, if we doo it not hid,
but vse and bestow it, as Christ doth vs bid.
What good to get riches by breaking of sleepe,
but (hauing the same) a good house for to keepe?
Not onely to bring a good fame to thy doore,
but also the praier to win of the poore.
Of all other dooings house keeping is cheefe,
for daily it helpeth the poore with releefe;
The neighbour, the stranger, and all that haue neede,
which causeth thy dooings the better to speede.
Though harken[1] to this we should euer among,[E137]
yet cheefly at Christmas, of all the yeare long.
Good cause of that vse may appeare by the name,
though niggerly niggards doo kick at the same.
[1] hardnes. 1577
28.
¶ _A description of the feast of the birth of Christ, commonly called
Christmas.[1]
Chap._ 26.
Of Christ cometh Christmas, the name with the feast,
a time full of ioie to the greatest and least:
At Christmas was Christ (our Sauiour) borne,
the world through sinne altogether forlorne.
At Christmas the daies doo[2] begin to take length,
of Christ doth religion cheefly[3] take strength.
As Christmas is onely a figure or trope,
so onely in Christ is the strength of our hope.
At Christmas we banket, the rich with the poore,
who then (but the miser) but openeth [h]is doore?
At Christmas of Christ many Carols we sing,
and giue many gifts in the ioy of that King.
At Christmas in Christ we reioice and be glad,
as onely of whom our comfort is had;[E138]
At Christmas we ioy altogether with mirth,
for his sake that ioyed vs all with his birth.
[1] A description of Christmas. 1577.
[2] the day doth. 1577.
[3] Of Christ our faith doth begin, etc. 1577.
29.
¶ _A description of apt time to spend.
Chap._ 27.
Let such (so fantasticall) liking not this,
nor any thing honest that ancient is,
Giue place to the time that so meete we doo see
appointed of God as it seemeth to bee.
At Christmas good husbands[E139] haue corne on the ground,
in barne, and in soller, woorth many a pound,
With plentie of other things,[1] cattle and sheepe,
all sent them (no doubt on) good houses to keepe.
At Christmas the hardnes of Winter doth rage,
a griper of all things and specially age:
Then lightly[E140] poore people, the yoong with the old,
be sorest oppressed with hunger and cold.
At Christmas by labour is little to get,
that wanting, the poorest in danger are set.
What season then better, of all the whole yeere,
thy needie poore neighbour to comfort and cheere?
[1] Things plentie in house. 1577.
30.
¶ _Against fantasticall scruplenes.
Chap._ 28.
At this time and that time[1] some make a great matter,
som help not but hinder the poore with their clatter.
Take custome from feasting, what commeth then last,
where one hath a dinner, a hundred shall fast.
To dog in the manger some liken I could,
that hay will eate none, nor let other that would;
Some scarce in a yeere giue a dinner or twoo,
nor well can abide any other to doo.
Play thou the good fellow, seeke none to misdeeme,
disdaine not the honest, though merie they seeme:
For oftentimes seene, no more verie a knaue
than he that doth counterfait most to be graue.
[1] this thing and that thing. 1577.
31.
¶ _Christmas husbandlie fare.
Chap._ 29.
Good husband and huswife now cheefly be glad,
things handsom to haue, as they ought to be had;
They both doo prouide against Christmas doo come,
to welcome good neighbour, good cheere to haue some.
[Sidenote: Christmas cuntrie fare.]
Good bread and good drinke, a good fier in the hall,
brawne, pudding and souse, and good mustard withall.
Beefe, mutton, and porke, shred pies of the best,
pig, veale, goose and capon,[E141] and turkey well drest;
Cheese, apples and nuts, ioly Carols to heare,
as then in the countrie is counted good cheare.
What cost to good husband is any of this?
good houshold prouision onely it is.
Of other the like, I doo leaue out a menie,
that costeth the husbandman neuer a penie.
32.
¶ _A Christmas Caroll of the birth of Christ vpon the tune of King
Salomon.[E142]
Chap._ 30.
Was not Christ our Sauiour
sent to vs fro God aboue?
not for our good behauiour,
but onely of his mercie and loue.
If this be true, as true it is,
truely in deede,
great thanks to God to yeeld for this,
then had we neede.
This did our God for very troth,
to traine to him the soule of man,
and iustly to performe his oth
to Sara and to Abram than,
That through his seed all nations should
most blessed bee:
As in due time performe he would,
as now wee see.[1]
Which woonderously is brought to pas,
and in our sight alredie donne,
by sending as his promise was
(to comfort vs) his onely sonne,
Euen Christ (I meane) that virgins child,
in Bethlem[2] borne,
that Lambe of God, that Prophet mild,
with crowned thorne.
Such was his loue to saue vs all,
from dangers of the curse of God,
that we stood in by Adams fall,
and by our owne deserued rod,
That through his blood and holie name
who so beleeues,[3]
and flie from sinne and abhors the same,[E143]
free mercie he geeues.
For these glad newes this feast doth bring:
to God the Sonne and holy Ghost
let man giue thanks, reioice, and sing,
from world to world, from cost to cost:
for all good gifts so many waies
that God doth send,
let vs in Christ giue God the praies,
till life shall end.
_T. Tusser._
[6]
At Christmas be merie and thankfull withall,
And feast thy poore neighbors, the great with the small,
Yea, all the yeere long, to the poore let vs giue,
Gods blessing to folow vs while wee doo liue.
[1] all flesh should see. 1577.
[2] Bethelem. 1577.
[3] to such as beleues. 1577.
33.
¶ _Januaries abstract.
Chap._ 31.
Bid Christmas adew,
thy stock now renew.
Who killeth a neat,
hath cheaper his meat.
Fat home fed souse,
is good in a house.
Who dainties loue,
a begger shall proue.
Who alway selles,
in hunger dwelles.
Who nothing saue,
shall nothing haue.
Lay durt vpon heapes,
some profit it reapes.
When weather is hard,
get muck out of yard.
A fallow bestowe,
where pease shall growe.
Good peason and white,
a fallow will quite.
Go gather quickset,
the yongest go get.
Dig garden, stroy mallow,
set willow and sallow.
Gréene willow for stake
in bank will take.[1]
Let Doe go to buck,
with Conie[2] good luck.
Spare labour nor monie,
store borough with conie.
Get warrener bound
to vermin thy ground.
Féed Doues, but kill not,
if loose them ye will not.
Doue house repaire,
make Douehole faire.
For hop ground cold,
Doue doong woorth gold.
Good gardiner mine,
make garden fine.
Set garden pease,
and beanes if ye please.
Set Respis and Rose,
yoong rootes of those.
The timelie buier
hath cheaper his fier.
Some burns without wit,
some fierles sit.
Now season is good
to lop or fell wood.
Prune trées some allows
for cattle to brows.
Giue shéepe to their fées
the mistle of trées.
Let lop be shorne
that hindreth corne.
Saue edder and stake,
strong hedge to make.
For sap as ye knowe,
let one bough growe.
Next yéere ye may
that bough cut away.
A lesson good
to encrease more wood.
16[3]
Saue crotchis of wud,
saue spars and stud.
Saue hop for his dole,
the strong long pole.
How euer ye scotch,
saue pole and crotch.
From Christmas to May,
weake cattle decay.
With vergis acquaint
poore bullock so faint;
This medcin approoued
is for to be looued.
Let plaister lie
thrée daies to trie:
too long if ye stay,
taile rots away.
Eawes readie to yeane
craues ground rid cleane.
Kéepe shéepe out of briers,
Kéepe beast out of miers.
Kéepe bushes from bill,
till hedge ye will:
Best had for thy turne,
their rootes go and burne.
No bushes of mine,
if fence be thine.
In stubbed plot,
fill hole with clot.[4]
Rid grasse of bones,
of sticks and stones.
Warme barth giue lams,
good food to their dams,
Look daily well to them,
least dogs vndoo them.
Yoong lamb well sold,
fat lamb woorth goold.
Kéepe twinnes for bréed,
as eawes haue néed.[5]
One calfe if it please ye,
now reared shall ease ye.
Calues likely reare,
at rising of yeare.
Calfe large and leane
is best to weane.
Calfe lickt take away,
and howse it[6] ye may.
This point I allow
for seruant and cow.
Calues yonger than other
learne one of another.
No danger at all
to geld as they fall.
Yet Michel cries[E144]
please butchers eies.
Sow ready to fare,
craues huswiues[7] care.
Leaue sow but fiue,
the better to thriue.
Weane such for store
as sucks before.
Weane onely but thrée
large bréeders to bée.
Lamb, bulchin,[E145] and pig,
geld vnder the big.
Learne wit, sir dolt,
in gelding of colt.
Geld yoong thy filly,
else perish will ginny.
Let gelding alone,
so large of bone.
By breathely tits
few profit hits.
Bréede euer the best,
and doo of the rest,
Of long and large,
take huswife a charge.
Good cow & good ground[8]
yéelds yéerely a pound.
Good faring sow
holds profit with cow.
Who kéepes but[9] twaine,
the more may gaine.
42[10]
Tith iustly, good garson,
else driue will the parson.
Thy garden twifallow,
stroy hemlock and mallow.
Like practise they prooue,
that hops doe looue.
Now make and wand in
trim bower to stand in.
Leaue wadling about,
till arbor be out.
Who now sowes otes,
gets gold and grotes.
Who sowes in May
gets little that way.
Go breake vp land,
get mattock in hand,
Stub roote so tough,
for breaking of plough.
What greater crime
then losse of time?
49[11]
Lay land or[12] lease
breake vp if ye please.
But fallow not yet,
that hast any wit.
Where drink ye sowe,
good tilth bestowe.
Small profit is found,
by péeling of ground.
Land past the best
cast vp to[13] rest.
Thus endeth Januaries abstract, agréeing with Januaries husbandrie.
Get pulling hooke (sirs),
for broome and firs.
Pluck broome, broome still,
cut broome, broome kill.
Broome pluckt by and by,
breake vp for rie.
Friend ringle thy hog,
or looke for a dog.
In casting prouide,
for séede lay aside.
Get doong, friend mine,
for stock and vine.
If earth be not soft,
go dig it aloft.
For quamier get bootes,
stub alders and rootes.
Hop poles waxe scant,
for poles mo plant.
Set chestnut and walnut,
set filbeard and smalnut.
Peach, plumtrée, & cherie,
yoong bay and his berie.
Or set their stone,
vnset leaue out none.
Sowe kirnels to beare,
of apple and peare.
All trées that beare goom
set now as they coom.
Now set or remooue
such stocks as ye looue.[14]
Here ends Januaries short remembrances.
[1]
Green set as a stake
in banke they wil take. 1577.
[2] conney. 1577.
[3] St. 16 and the second couplets in sts. 21 and 22 are not here in
1577.
[4] Here follows in 1577,
Take for thy turne,
their roots go burne.
[5] feede. 1577.
[6] if. 1577.
[7] huswifes. 1577.
[8] Good milch kow and sound. 1577.
[9] both. 1577.
[10] St. 42 is not in 1577.
[11] Sts. 49 and 50 are not in 1577.
[12] for. M.
[13] the. 1577.
[14]
And set or remoue
what fruite ye loue. 1577.
34.
_Of trees or fruites to be set or remooued._
1 Apple trées of all sorts.
2 Apricocks.[E146]
3 Barberies.
4 Boollesse,[E147] black & white.
5 Cheries,[E148] red and black.
6 Chestnuts.[E149]
7 Cornet plums.[E150]
8 Damsens,[1][E151] white & black.
9 Filbeards,[E152] red and white.
10 Goose beries.[E153]
11 Grapes,[E154] white and red.
12 Gréene or grasse plums.[E155]
13 Hurtillberies.[E156]
14 Medlars[E157] or marles.
15 Mulberie.[E158]
16 Peaches,[E159] white and red.
17 Peares of all sorts.
18 Perareplums,[2][E160] black & yelow.
19 Quince[E161] trées.
20 Respis.[E162]
21 Reisons.[E163]
22 Small nuts.
23 Strawberies, red and white.
24 Seruice trées.[E164]
25 Walnuts.[E165]
26 Wardens,[E166] white and red.
27 Wheat plums.
[28]
Now set ye may
the box and bay,
Haithorne and prim,
for clothes trim.
[1] Damisens. 1577.
[2] _sic_ also in 1577.
35.
¶ _Januaries husbandrie.
Chap._ 32.
A kindly good Janiuéere,
Fréeseth pot by the féere.
Forgotten month past,
Doe now at the last.
[Sidenote: Husbandly lessons.]
When Christmas is ended, bid feasting adue,
goe play the good husband, thy stock to renue.
Be mindfull of rearing, in hope of a gaine,
dame profit shall giue thee reward for thy paine.
Who both by his calfe and his lamb will be knowne,
may well kill a neate and a sheepe of his owne.
And he that can reare vp a pig in his house,
hath cheaper his bacon and sweeter his souse.
Who eateth his veale, pig and lamb being froth,[E167]
shall twise in a weeke go to bed without broth.[1]
Vnskilfull that passe not, but sell away sell,
shall neuer haue plentie where euer they dwell.
Be greedie in spending, and careles to saue,
and shortly be needie and readie to craue.
Be wilfull to kill and vnskilfull to store,
and looke for no foison,[2] I tell thee before.[E168]
Lay dirt vpon heapes, faire yard to be seene,
if frost will abide it, to feeld with it cleene.[E169]
In winter a fallow some loue to bestowe,
where pease for the pot[3] they intend for to sowe.
[Sidenote: Quick set now.]
In making or mending as needeth thy ditch,
get set to quick set it, learne cunningly whitch.[4]
In hedging (where clay is) get stake as ye knowe,
of popler and willow, for fewell to growe.
[Sidenote: Kéepe cleane thy douehous.]
Leaue killing of conie,[5] let Doe go to buck,
and vermine thy burrow, for feare of ill luck.
Feed Doue (no more killing), old Doue house[E170] repaire,
saue doue dong for hopyard, when house ye make faire.
[Sidenote: ¶ Runciual peason.]
Dig garden, stroy mallow, now may ye at ease,
and set (as a daintie) thy runciuall pease.[6]
Go cut and set roses, choose aptly thy plot,
the rootes of the yoongest are best to be got.
[Sidenote: Timelie prouision for fewell.]
In time go and bargaine, least woorser doo fall,
for fewell, for making, for carriage and all.
To buie at the stub[E171] is the best for the buier,
more timelie prouision, the cheaper is fier.
[Sidenote: Ill husbandrie.]
Some burneth a lode at a time in his hall,
some neuer leaue burning til burnt they haue all.
Some making of hauock, without any wit,
make many poore soules without fire to sit.
[Sidenote: Pruning of trées.]
If frost doo continue, this lesson doth well,
for comfort of cattel the fewell to fell:
From euerie tree the superfluous bows
now prune for thy neat therevpon to go brows.[7]
[Sidenote: Mistle and iuie.]
In pruning and trimming all maner of trees,
reserue to ech cattel their properly fees.
If snowe doo continue, sheepe hardly that fare
craue Mistle and Iuie for them for to spare.
[Sidenote: Lopping of pollengers.]
Now lop for thy fewell old pollenger growen,
that hinder the corne or the grasse to be mowen.
In lopping and felling, saue edder and stake,[E172]
thine hedges as needeth to mend or to make.
In lopping,[8] old Jocham, for feare of mishap,
one bough stay vnlopped, to cherish the sap:
The second yeere after then boldly ye may,
for driping his fellowes, that bough cut away.
[Sidenote: The propertie of soft wood.]
Lop popler and sallow, elme, maple, and prie,
well saued from cattle, till Sommer to lie.
So far as in lopping, their tops ye doo fling,
so far without planting yoong copie will spring.[E173]
16[9]
Such fewell as standing a late ye haue bought,
now fell it, and make it, and doo as ye ought.
Giue charge to the hewers (that many things mars),
to hew out for crotches, for poles, and for spars.
[Sidenote: Hoppoles and crotches.]
If hopyard or orchard ye mind for to haue,
for hoppoles and crotches in lopping go saue.
Which husbandlie spared may serue at a push,
and stop by so hauing two gaps with a bush.
From Christmas, till May be well entered in,
some cattle waxe faint, and looke poorely and thin.
And cheefly when prime[E174] grasse[10] at first doth appeere,
then most is the danger of all the whole yeere.
[Sidenote: A medicen for faint cattell.]
Take vergis and heate it, a pint for a cow,
bay salt a hand full,[11] to rub tong ye wot how.
That done, with the salt, let hir drinke off the rest:
this manie times raiseth the feeble vp best.
[Sidenote: To fasten loose téeth in a bullock.]
Poore bullock with browsing and naughtily fed,
scarce feedeth, hir teeth be so loose in hir hed:
Then slise ye the taile where ye feele it so soft,
with soote and with garlike bound to it aloft.[12]
[Sidenote: Ewes vpon eaning.]
By brembles and bushes, in pasture too full,
poore sheepe be in danger and loseth their wull.[13]
Now therefore thine ewe, vpon lamming so neere,
desireth in pasture that all may be cleere.
Leaue grubbing or pulling of bushes (my sonne)
till timely thy fences require to be donne.
Then take of the best, for to furnish thy turne,
and home with the rest, for the fier to burne.
[Sidenote: Stubbing of gréenes.]
In euerie greene,[14] if the fence be not thine,
now stub vp the bushes, the grasse to be fine.
Least neighbour doo dailie so hack[15] them beliue,[E175]
that neither thy bushes nor pasture can thriue.
In ridding[16] of pasture with turfes that lie by,[17]
fill euerie hole vp, as close as a dy.
The labour is little, the profit is gay,
what euer the loitering labourers say.
The sticks and the stones go and gather vp cleene,
for hurting of sieth or for harming of greene.[18]
For feare of Hew prowler,[E176] get home with the rest,
when frost is at hardest, then carriage is best.
[Sidenote: Yoong lambes.]
Yoong broome or good pasture thy ewes doo require,
warme barth and in safetie their lambes doo desire.
Looke often well to them, for foxes and dogs,
for pits and for brembles, for vermin and hogs.
More daintie[19] the lambe, the more woorth to be sold,
the sooner the better for eaw that is old.
But if ye doo minde to haue milke of the dame,
till Maie doo not seuer the lambe fro the same.
[Sidenote: Rearing of lambes.]
Ewes yeerly by twinning rich maisters doo make,
the lamb of such twinners for breeders go take.
For twinlings[E177] be twiggers, encrease for to bring,
though som for their twigging _Peccantem_[E178] may sing.
[Sidenote: Rearing of calues.]
Calues likely that come between Christmas and Lent,
take huswife to reare, or else after repent:
Of such as doo fall betweene change and the prime,[20]
no rearing, but sell or go kill them in time.
[Sidenote: Howsing of cattel.]
Howse calfe, and go sockle it twise in a day,
and after a while, set it water and hay.
Stake ragged to rub on, no such as will bend,
then weane it well tended, at fiftie daies end.[21]
The senior weaned his yoonger shall teach,
how both to drinke water and hay for to reach.[22]
More stroken and made of when ought it doo aile,
more gentle ye make it, for yoke or the paile.[E179]
[Sidenote: Of gelding.]
Geld bulcalfe and ram lamb, as soone as they fall,
for therein is lightly no danger at all.
Some spareth the ton for to pleasure the eie,
to haue him shew greater when butcher shall bie.
[Sidenote: ¶]
Sowes readie to farrow this time of the yeere
are for to be made of and counted full deere.
For now is the losse of a fare of the sow
more great then the losse of two calues of thy cow.
[Sidenote: ¶ Rearing of pigs.]
Of one sow togither reare few aboue fiue,
and those of the fairest and likest to thriue.
Ungelt of the best keepe a couple for store,
one bore pig and sow pig, that sucketh before.[E180]
[Sidenote: ¶ A way to haue large bréed of hogs.]
Who hath a desire to haue store verie large,
at Whitsontide let him giue huswife a charge,
To reare of a sow at once onely but three,
and one of them also a bore let it bee.
[Sidenote: ¶ Gelding time.]
Geld vnder the dam, within fortnight at least,
and saue both thy monie and life of the beast.
Geld later with gelders as many one do,
and looke of a doozen to geld away two.
[Sidenote: Gelding of horse coltes.]
Thy colts for thy saddle geld yoong to be light,
for cart doo not so, if thou iudgest aright.
Nor geld not but when they be lustie and fat:
for there is a point, to be learned in that.
[Sidenote: Gelding of fillies.]
Geld fillies (but tits) er an nine daies of age,
they die else of gelding (or gelders doo rage).
Yoong fils[E181] so likelie of bulke and of bone:
keepe such to be breeders, let gelding alone.
[Sidenote: Reare the fairest of al things.]
For gaining a trifle, sell neuer thy store,
what ioy to acquaintance, what pleasureth more?
The larger of bodie, the better for breede:
more forward of growing, the better they speede.
[Sidenote: ¶ Of cow and sow.]
Good milchcow, well fed, that is faire and sound,
is yeerely for profit as good as a pound:
And yet by the yeere, I haue prooued er[23] now,
as good to the purse is a sow as a cow.
[Sidenote: ¶]
Keepe one and keepe both, with as little a cost,
then all shall be saued and nothing be lost.
Both hauing togither what profit is caught,
good huswifes (I warrant ye) need not be taught.
[Sidenote: ¶]
42[24]
For lamb, pig and calfe, and for other the like,
tithe so as thy cattle the Lord doo not strike.
Or if yee deale guilefully, parson will dreue,
and so to your selfe a worse turne ye may geue.
Thy garden plot latelie well trenched and muckt,
would now be twifallowd, the mallowes out pluckt,[25]
Well clensed and purged of roote and of stone,
that falt therein afterward found may be none.
[Sidenote: Wéeding of hopyard.]
Remember thy hopyard, if season be drie,
now dig it and weed it, and so let it lie.
More fennie the laier the better his lust,
more apt to beare hops when it crumbles like dust.
[Sidenote: Trimming up arbors.]
To arbor begun, and quick setted[26] about,
no poling nor wadling[27] till set be far out.
For rotten and aged may stand for a shew,
but hold to their tackling there doe but a few.[28][E182]
[Sidenote: Sowing of otes. Late sowing not good.]
In Janiuere[29] husband that poucheth the grotes
will break vp his laie, or be sowing of otes,
Otes sowen in Janiuere, laie[30] by the wheat,
in May by the hay for the cattle to eat.[31][E183]
Let seruant be readie, with mattock in hand,
to stub out the bushes that noieth the land:
And cumbersome rootes, so annoieng the plough,
turne vpward their arses with sorrow inough.
[Sidenote: Breaking up lay in som countrie.]
Who breaketh vp timelie his fallow or lay,
sets forward his husbandrie many a way.
This trimlie well ended doth forwardly bring,[32]
not onelie thy tillage, but all other thing.
49[33]
Though lay land ye breke vp when Christmas is gon,
for sowing of barlie[34] or otes therevpon,
Yet hast[e] not to fallow til March be begun,
least afterward wishing it had ben vndun.
Such land as ye breake vp for barlie to sowe,
two earthes at the least er ye sowe it bestowe.[35]
If land be thereafter, set oting apart,
and follow this lesson, to comfort thine hart.
Some breaking vp laie soweth otes to begin,[36]
to suck out the moisture so sower therein.
Yet otes with hir sucking a peeler is found,
both ill to the maister and worse to som ground.
Land arable driuen or worne to the proofe,
and[37] craueth some rest for thy profits behoofe.
With otes ye may sowe it, the sooner to grasse,
more soone to be pasture to bring it to passe.
Thus endeth Januaries husbandrie.
[1] "Broath is still us'd in some Farm Houses for Supper Meat, and
Roast Meat look'd upon as very ill Husbandry."--T.R.
[2] looke not for foyzen. 1577. "_Foyzon_ is Winter Food."--T.R.
[3] "Pease boyling or not boyling is one of the Farmers occult
Qualities; but fresh, and next to it, well dunged Grounds are observed
to produce the best Boylers, perhaps because they retain most
moisture."--T.R.
[4] "By Experience Garden Quicksets are found to be the best, ...
because they are all of an age."--T.R.
[5] "The common time of ending their Slaught (or Slaughter as the
Warreners term it) is _Candlemas_."--T.R.
[6] "The most forward Pea is the Rogue, they are pick'd from the
Hasting and Hotspur."--T.R.
[7] "Since the use of Turneps Cattel need not be hard put to it in
snowy weather as formerly."--T.R.
[8] "This is more proper in Underwood than Pollards, at least more
in use at present; few Pollards perish for want of it, but Runt-wood
will."--T.R.
[9] St. 16 is not in 1577.
[10] "Prime Grass appears commonly in woody moist Grounds, on Hedge
Banks, and is so called from its earliness; when Cattle have tasted
this they begin to loath their dry food. It is often sprung before
_Candlemas_."--T.R.
[11] full a hand. 1577.
[12] "This remedy still is in Practice.... The first indication of
corrupt blood is from the staring Hairs on the Tail near the Rump. Some
instead of Soot and Garlick put a Dock Root, or the Root of a Bears
Foot, which they call a Gargat Root, others flay the Dewlaps to the
very Shoulders."--T.R.
[13] "Large Ant-Hills is much the best shelter for Ewes and
Lambs."--T.R.
[14] "This is understood of Hedge Greens ... a space next the Hedge of
a Rod or more in breadth."--T.R.
[15] make. 1577.
[16] "When you rid it of Bushes or Ant Hills."--T.R.
[17] with turnes so bye. 1577.
[18] "Hedge Greens."--T.R.
[19] "Likely, or thriving, such as will soon require more Milk than his
old Dam can afford him."--T.R.
[20] "The first three days after the new moon or change."--T.R.
[21] "At present we rarely wean under twelve weeks."--- T.R. 1710.
[22] "The hay is given them stuck in cleft sticks."--T.R.
[23] or. 1577.
[24] St. 42 is not in 1577.
[25] "In trenching, bury no Mallow, Nettle-dock, or Briony Roots."--T.R.
[26] "Quick setted Arbors are now out of use, as agreeing very ill with
the Ladies Muslins."--T.R. 1710.
[27] "Wattles are wood slit."--T.R.
[28] they cannot but feaw. 1577.
[29] January. 1577.
[30] "lay them by thy wheate" in _100 Good Points_.
[31] "Such early sown Oats it is likely may be clearer of weeds; and
if I buy my Hay in May, that is, before my Chapman knows what Quantity
he shall have, he is rul'd by his Necessity for some ready money in
Hand."--T.R.
[32] This tilth is a tilture, well forward doth bring. 1577.
[33] Sts. 49 and 50 are not in 1577.
[34] "Barley is now very rarely, if at all, sown on lay land.
The fallow he speaks of I take to be the second ploughing for
Barley."--T.R. 1710. Gervase Markham, in his _English Husbandman_,
directs a digging in May, another, with manuring, in October, and "the
last time of your digging and setting shall be at the beginning of
April."
[35] "Barley-Ground ought to be as fine as an Ash-heap."--T.R.
[36] "Where the Ground is over rich, it fines and sweetens it."--T.R.
[37] "It" in _Tusser Redivivus_. "and." 1577.
36.
¶ _Februaries abstract._
* * * Februaries Abstract and Februaries Husbandry in the edition of
1577 differ much from that of 1580.
_Chap._ 33.
Lay compas ynow,
er euer ye plow.
Place doongheapes alowe,
more barlie to growe.
Eat etch er ye plow,
with hog, shéepe and cow.
Sowe lintels ye may,
and peason gray.
Kéepe white vnsowne,
till more be knowne.
Sow pease (good trull)
the Moone past full.
Fine séedes then sowe,
whilst Moone doth growe.
Boy, follow the plough,
and harrow inough.
So harrow ye shall,
till couerd be all.
Sowe pease not too thin,
er plough ye set in.
Late sowen sore noieth,
late ripe, hog stroieth.
Some prouender saue,
for plowhorse to haue.
To oxen that drawe,
giue hay and not strawe.
To stéeres ye may
mixe strawe with hay.
Much carting, ill tillage,
makes som to flie village.
Use cattle aright,
to kéepe them in plight.
Good quickset bie,
old gatherd will die.
12[1]
Stick bows a rowe,
where runciuals growe.
Sowe kirnels and hawe,
where ridge ye did drawe.
Sowe mustard séed,
and helpe to kill wéed.
Where sets doo growe,
sée nothing ye sowe.
Cut vines and osier,
plash hedge of enclosier.
Féed highly thy swan,
to loue hir good man.
Nest high I aduise,
least floud doe arise.
Land meadow spare,
there doong is good ware.
Go strike off the nowles
of deluing mowles.
Such hillocks in vaine
lay leauelled plaine.
To wet the land,
let mowle hill stand.
Poore cattle craue
some shift to haue.
Cow little giueth
that hardly liueth.
Rid barlie al now,
cleane out of thy mow.
Choice séed out drawe,
saue cattle the strawe.
To coast man ride
Lent stuffe to prouide.
Thus endeth Februaries abstract, agréeing with Februaries husbandrie.
[23]
Trench medow and redge,
dike, quickset, and hedge.
To plots not full,
ad bremble and hull.
[24]
Let wheat and the rie
for thresher still lie.
Such strawe some saue,
for thacker to haue.
[25]
Poore cunnie, so bagged,
is soone ouer lagged.
Plash burrow, set clapper,
for dog is a snapper.[E184]
[26]
Good flight who loues,
must féed their doues.
Bid hauking adew,
cast hauke into mew.[E185]
[27]
Kéepe lambes from fox,
else shepherd go box.
[28]
Good neighbour mine,
now yoke thy swine.
Now euerie day,
set hops ye may.
[29]
Now set for thy pot,
best herbes to be got.
For flowers go set,
all sorts ye can get.
[30]
As winter doth prooue,
so may ye remooue.
Now all things reare,
for all the yeare.
[31]
Watch ponds, go looke
to wéeles and hooke.
Knaues seld repent
to steale in Lent.
[32]
Alls fish they get
that commeth to net.[E186]
Who muck regards
makes hillocks in yards.
Here ends Februaries short remembrances.
[1] Stanza 12 is 4, and st. 22 is 1 in 1577.
37.
¶ _Februaries husbandrie.
Chap._ 34.
Feb, fill the dike[E187]
With what thou dost like.[1]
Forgotten month past
Doe now at the last.
Who laieth on doong er he laieth on plow,
such husbandrie vseth as thrift doth alow.
One month er ye spred it, so still let it stand,
er euer to plow it, ye take it in hand.
Place doong heape a low by the furrough along,
where water all winter time did it such wrong.
So make ye the land to be lustie and fat,
and corne thereon sowen to be better for that.
Go plow in the stubble, for now is the season,
for sowing of fitchis, of beanes, and of peason.
Sowe runciuals timelie, and all that be gray,
but sowe not the white till S. Gregories day.[2]
Sowe peason and beanes in the wane of the Moone,[3]
who soweth them sooner, he soweth too soone.
That they with the planet may rest and arise,
and flourish with bearing most plentifull wise.
Friend, harrow in time, by some maner of meanes,
not onely thy peason, but also thy beanes.
Unharrowed die, being buried in clay,
where harrowed florish, as flowers in May.
Both peason and beanes sowe afore ye doo plow,[4]
the sooner ye harrow, the better for yow.[5]
White peason so good for the purse and the pot:
let them be well vsed else well doo ye not.
Haue eie vnto haruest what euer ye sowe,
for feare of mischances, by riping too slowe.
Least corne be destroied, contrarie to right,
by hogs or by cattel, by day or by night.[6]
Good prouender labouring horses would haue,
good haie and good plentie, plow oxen doo craue.
To hale out the muck and to plow vp thy ground:
or else it may hinder thee many a pound.
Who slacketh his tillage, a carter to bee,
for grote got abrode, at home lose shall three.
And so by his dooing he brings out of hart
both land for the corne and horse for the cart.
Who abuseth his cattle and sterues them for meat,
by carting or plowing, his gaine is not great.
Where he that with labour can vse them aright,
hath gaine to his comfort, and cattle in plight.
Buie quickset at market, new gatherd and small,
buie bushes or willow, to fence it withall.
Set willowes to growe, in the steede of a stake,
for cattel in sommer, a shadow to make.
Stick plentie of bows among runciuall pease[7]
to climber thereon, and to branch at their ease.
So dooing, more tender and greater they wex,
if peacock[8] and turkey leaue iobbing their bex.[E188]
Now sowe and go harrow (where redge ye did draw[9])
the seed of the bremble, with kernell and haw.
Which couered ouerlie, soone to shut out,
goe see it be ditched and fenced about.[E189]
[Sidenote: Sowe mustard séede.]
Where banks be amended and newly vp cast,
sow mustard seed,[10] after a shower be past.
Where plots full of nettles be noisome to eie,
sowe therevpon hempseed, and nettle will die.
[Sidenote: Cut or set vines.]
The vines[11] and the osiers cut and go set,
if grape be vnpleasant, a better go get.
Feed swan, and go make hir vp strongly a nest,
for feare of a floud, good and high is the best.
[Sidenote: Catching of mowls.]
Land meadow that yeerly is spared for hay,
now fence it and spare it, and doong it ye may.
Get mowle catcher cunninglie mowle for to kill,
and harrow and cast abrode euerie hill.[E190]
Where meadow or pasture to mowe ye doo laie,
let mowle be dispatched some maner of waie.
Then cast abrode mowlhill, as flat as ye can,
for many commodities following than.
If pasture by nature is giuen to be wet,
then bare with the mowlhill, though thick it be set.
That lambe may sit on it, and so to sit drie,
or else to lie by it, the warmer to lie.[E191]
[Sidenote: Looke well to thy fence.]
Friend, alway let this be a part of thy care,
for shift of good pasture, lay pasture to spare.
So haue you good feeding, in bushets and lease,[E192]
and quickly safe finding of cattel at ease.
Where cattel may run about, rouing at wil,
from pasture to pasture, poor bellie to fil,
There pasture and cattel both hungrie and bare,
for want of good husbandrie worser doo fare.
Now thresh out thy barlie, for malt or for seed,
for bread corne (if need be) to serue as shall need.
If worke for the thresher ye mind for to haue,
of wheat and of mestlen[E193] vnthreshed go saue.
Now timelie for Lent stuffe[12] thy monie disburse,
the longer ye tarie for profit the wurse,
If one penie vantage be therein to saue,
of coast man or fleming be sure to haue.[E194]
Thus endeth Februaries husbandrie.
[1] with what ye like. 1577.
[2] 12th of March.
[3] "Pease and Beans sown during the Increase do run more to Hawm or
Straw, and during the Declension more to Cod, according to the common
consent of country men. And I must own I have experienced it; but I
will not aver it so as that it is not lyable to exceptions."--T.R.
[4] "This is called sowing under furrow, just before the second
ploughing, which if neatly done lays them in rows."--T.R.
[5] "Because if they lye until they are swell'd the horse-footing is
apt to endanger them."--T.R.
[6] "This regards Field Land; for in our Author's time Enclosures were
not so frequent as now."--T.R. 1710.
[7] "Runcival pease find now very little Entertainment in Gentlemen's
Gardens.... In their room are got the Egg pea, the Sugar pea, Dutch
admirals, etc."--T.R., 1710.
[8] "A Peacock, altho' a lovely Fowl to look on, ... is a very
ill-natured Bird."--T.R.
[9] "A way of quicksetting or fencing Enclosures out of the common
Field they had in the days of our Author."--T.R.
[10] "This is most in practice in Marshy Countreys."--T.R.
[11] "Those that thrive best with us are the small black Grape, the
white Muscadine, and the Parsley grape."--T.R.
[12] "This Article is very much unregarded by Farmers at present,
for fear, I suppose, of falling into Popery and Superstition; but
lay that quite aside, and let us consult our Interest, Health, and
Gratitude."--T.R. The writer of _Tusser Redivivus_ here enlarges on
the advantages, personal and national, of fish diet. Under Marches
Husbandry, stanza 3, he mentions "Salt Fish, Furmity, Gruel, Wigs,
Milk, Parsnips, Hasty-pudding, Pancakes, and twice a week Eggs," as the
Farmer's Lenten Diet.
38.
¶ _Marches abstract.
Chap._ 35.
White peason sowe,
scare hungry crow.
Spare meadow for hay,
spare marshes at May.
3[1]
Kéepe shéepe from dog,
kéepe lambes from hog.
If foxes mowse[2] them,
then watch or howse them.
March drie or wet,
hop ground go set.
Yoong rootes well drest
prooue euer[3] best.
Grant hop great hill
to growe at will.
From hop long gut
away go cut.
Here learne the way
hop rootes to lay.
Rootes best to prooue,
thus set I looue.
Leaue space and roome,
to hillock to coome.
Of hedge and willow
hop makes his[4] pillow.
Good bearing hop
climes vp to the top.
Kéepe hop from sunne,
and hop is vndunne.
Hop tooles procure
that may endure.
Iron crowe like a stake,
déepe hole to make.
A scraper to pare
the earth about bare.
A hone to raise roote,
like sole of a boote.
Sharpe knife to cut
superfluous gut.
Who graffing looues,
now graffing prooues.
Of euerie suite,
graffe daintie fruite.
Graffe good fruite all,
or graffe not at all.
Graffe soone may be lost,
both grafting and cost.
Learne here[5] take héed
what counsell doth béed.[6]
Sowe barlie that can,
too soone ye shall ban.
Let horse kéepe his owne,
till barlie be sowne.
Sowe euen thy land,
with plentifull hand.
Sowe ouer and vnder,
in claie is no woonder.
13[7]
By sowing in wet,
is little to get.
Straight folow the plough,
and harrow inough.
With sling go throwe,[8]
to scare away crowe.
Rowle after a deaw,
when barlie doth sheaw.
More handsom to make it,
to mowe and to rake it.
Learne here ye may
best harrowing way.
17[9]
Now rowle thy wheat,
where clods be too great.
Make readie a plot,
for séeds for the pot.
Best searching minds
the best waie finds.
For garden best
is south southwest.
Good tilth brings séedes,
euill tilture, wéedes.
For sommer sowe now,
for winter sée how.
Learne time to knowe,
to set or sowe.[10]
Yoong plants soone die,
that growes too drie.
In countrie doth rest,
what season is best.
Good peason and léekes
makes pottage for créekes.
Haue spoone meat inough,
for cart and the plough.
Good poore mans fare,
is poore mans care.
And not to boast,
of sod and roast.
Cause rooke and rauen
to séeke a new hauen.
Thus endeth Marches abstract, agréeing with Marches husbandrie.
[29]
Geld lambes now all,
straight as they fall.
Looke twise a day,
least lambes decay.
[30]
Where horse did harrow,
put stones in barrow,
And[11] laie them by,
in heapes on by.
[31]
Let oxe once fat
lose nothing of that.
Now hunt with dog,
vnyoked hog.
[32]
With Doues good luck,
reare[12] goose and duck.
To spare aright
spare March his flight.
[33] The following additional couplets are in 1577.
Saue chikins poore buttocks
from pye, crowe, & puttocks.
Some loue now best
yong rabbets nest.
Now knaues will steale
pig, lamb, and veale.
Here learne to knowe
what seedes to sowe.
And such to plant
whose seedes do want.
[1] St. 3, first couplet,
What champion useth
woodland refuseth. 1577.
[2] mouth them. 1573 (M.); mowse. 1577.
[3] the. 1573, 1577.
[4] her. 1577.
[5] to. 1577.
[6] bid, 1577; beed, 1585; breed, 1614.
[7] St. 13 is not in 1577.
[8] sling or bowe. 1577.
[9] Stanzas 17, 26, and first couplet of 27 are not in 1577.
[10] Lines transposed in 1577.
[11] or. 1577.
[12] hen. 1577.
39.
_Seedes and herbes for the Kitchen._
1 Auens.[E195]
2 Betanie.[E196]
3 Bléets or béets,[E197] white or yellow.
4 Bloodwoort[E198] [Bloodwoorth, 1577].
5 Buglas.[E199]
6 Burnet.[E200]
7 Burrage.[E201]
8 Cabage remoue in June.
9 Clarie.[E202]
10 Coleworts.[E203]
11 Cresses.
12 Endiue.
13 Fenell.[E204]
14 French Malows.
15 French Saffron set in August.
16 Langdebiefe.[E205]
17 Léekes[E206] remoue in June.
18 Lettis remoue in May.
19 Longwort.[E207]
20 Liuerwort.[E208]
21 Marigolds[E209] often cut.
22 Mercurie.[E210]
23 Mints at all times.
24 Nep.[E211]
25 Onions [Oyneons, 1577] from December to March.
26 Orach[E212] or arach, redde and white.
27 Patience.[E213]
28 Perceley.
29 Peneriall.[E214]
30 Primerose.[E215]
31 Poret.
32 Rosemary[E216] in the spring time [to growe south or west].[1]
33 Sage red and white.
34 [English][2] Saffron[E217] set in August.
35 Summer sauerie.
36 Sorell.
37 Spinage.[E218]
38 Suckerie.
39 Siethes.[E219]
40 Tanzie.[E220]
41 Time.
42 Violets of all sorts.
43 Winter sauerie.
[1] Omitted in 1577.
[2] Omitted in 1577.
40.
_Herbes and rootes for sallets and sauce._
1 Alexanders, at all times.
2 Artichoks.
3 Blessed thistle,[E221] or _Carduus benedictus_.
4 Cucumbers in April and May.
5 Cresies, sowe with Lettice in the spring.
6 Endiue.
7 Mustard séede, sowe in the spring and at Mihelmas.
8 Musk million, in April and May.
9 Mints.
10 Purslane.[E222]
11 Radish, and after remoue them.
12 Rampions.[E223]
13 Rokat,[E224] in April.
14 Sage.[E225]
15 Sorell.
16 Spinage, for the sommer.
17 Sea holie.[E226]
18 Sperage, let growe two yeares, and then remoue.
19 Skirrets, set these plants in March.
20 Suckerie.
21 Tarragon, set in slippes in March.[1]
22 Violets [of all coulors].[2]
These buie with the penie,
Or looke not for anie.
1 Capers.
2 Lemmans.
3 Oliues.
4 Orengis.
5 Rise.
6 Sampire.[E227]
[1] Tarragon, April, 1577.
[2] Omitted in 1577.
41.
_Herbes and rootes to boile or to butter._
1 Beanes, set in winter.
2 Cabbegis,[E228] sowe in March, and after remooue.
3 Carrets.
4 Citrons,[E229] sowe in May.
5 Goordes in May.
6 Nauewes sowe in June.
7 Pompions in May.
8 Perseneps in winter.
9 Runciuall pease set in winter.
10 Rapes sowe in June.
11 Turneps in March & April.
42.
_Strowing herbes of all sortes._
1 Bassel,[E230] fine and busht, sowe in May.
2 Baulme, set in March.
3 Camamel.
4 Costmarie.[E231]
5 Cousleps and paggles.[E232]
6 Daisies of all sorts.
7 Swéete fennell.
8 Garmander.[E233]
9 Isop, set in Februarie.
10 Lauender.
11 Lauender spike.
12 Lauender cotten.[E234]
13 Maierom knotted, sowe or set at the spring.
14 Mawdelin.[E235]
15 Penal riall.
16 Roses of all sorts, in Januarie and September.
17 Red mints.
18 Sage.
19 Tanzie.
20 Violets.
21 Winter sauerie.
43.
_Herbes, branches, and flowers, for windowes and pots._
1 Baies,[E236] sowe or set in plants in Januarie.
2 Batchelers buttons.[E237]
3 Botles, blew, red, and tawnie.
4 Collembines.[E238]
5 Campions.
6 Cousleps.[1]
7 Daffadondillies.[E239]
8 Eglantine,[E240] or swéet brier.
9 Fetherfew.[E241]
10 Flower armor[2][E242] sowe in May.
11 Flower de luce.[E243]
12 Flower gentle,[E244] white and red.
13 Flower nice.
14 Gileflowers,[E245] red white and carnations, set in spring, and at
Haruest in pots, pailes or tubs, or for sommer in beds.
15 Holiokes,[E246] red, white and carnations.
16 Indian eie,[E247] sowe in May, or set in slips in March.
17 Lauender of all sorts.
18 Larkes foot.
19 Laus tibi.[E248]
20 Lillium cum valium.[3][E249]
21 Lillies, red and white, sowe or set in March and September.
22 Marigolds double.
23 Nigella Romana.[E250]
24 Pauncies or hartesease.[E251]
25 Paggles, gréene and yelow.
26 Pinkes of all sorts.
27 Quéenes gilleflowers.
28 Rosemarie.
29 Roses of all sorts.
30 Snag dragons.[4]
31 Sops in wine.[E252]
32 Swéete Williams.[E253]
33 Swéete Johns.[E254]
34 Star of Bethelem.
35 Star of Jerusalem.[E255]
36 Stocke gilleflowers of all sorts.
37 Tuft gilleflowers.[E256]
38 Veluet flowers,[E257] or french Marigolds.
39 Violets, yellow and white.
40 Wall gilleflowers of all sorts.
[1] Omitted in 1577.
[2] armour. 1577; amour. 1614.
[3] convallium. 1617
[4] Snap dragons. 1577.
44.
_Herbes to still in Sommer._
1 Blessed thistle.
2 Betanie [Betonye, 1577].
3 Dill.
4 Endiue.
5 Eiebright.[E258]
6 Fennell.
7 Fumetorie.[E259]
8 Isop.
9 Mints.
10 Plantine.
11 Roses red and damaske.
12 Respies.
13 Saxefrage.
14 Strawberies.
15 Sorell.
16 Suckerie.
17 Woodrofe[E260] for swéete waters and cakes.
45.
_Necessarie herbes to growe in the garden for Physick, not rehersed
before._
1 Annis.
2 Archangel.[E261]
3 Betanie.
4 Charuiel.
5 Cinqfile.
6 Cummin.[E262]
7 Dragons.
8 Detanie,[1][E263] or garden ginger.
9 Gromel[E264] séed, for the stone.
10 Hartstong.
11 Horehound.
12 Louage[E265] for the stone.
13 Licoras.
14 Mandrake.[E266]
15 Mogwort[E267] [Mogworth, 1577].
16 Pionées.
17 Poppie.
18 Rew.[E268]
19 Rubarb.
20 Smalach, for swellings.
21 Saxefrage, for the stone.
22 Sauin, for the bots.[E269]
23 Stitchwort.[E270]
24 Valerian.
25 Woodbine.[E271]
[26]
Thus ends in bréefe,
Of herbes the chéefe,
To get more skill,
Read whom ye will,
Such mo to haue,
Of field go craue.
[1] Betany, in 1577. Thus mistakes in synonyms arise.
46.
¶ _Marches husbandrie.
Chap._ 36.
March dust to be sold,
Worth ransome of gold.
Forgotten month past,
Doe now at the last.
[Sidenote: [Sowing of white peason. 1577.]]
White peason, both good for the pot and the purse,[1]
by sowing too timelie, prooue often the wurse.
Bicause they be tender and hateth the cold,
prooue March er ye sowe them, for being too bold.
[Sidenote: Spare eating of meadowe.]
Spare meadow at Gregorie,[E272] marshes at Pask,
for feare of drie Sommer, no longer time ask.
Then hedge them and ditch them, bestow thereon pence:
corne, meadow and pasture, aske alway good fence.
[Sidenote: In Lent haue an ey to shéep biters.]
Of mastiues and mungrels,[E273] that manie we see,
a number of thousands too manie there bee.
Watch therefore in Lent, to thy sheepe go and looke,
for dogs will haue vittles,[2] by hooke or by crooke.[E274]
[Sidenote: Setting of hops.]
In March at the furdest, drie season or wet,
hop rootes so well chosen, let skilfull go set.
The goeler[3] and yonger the better I loue;
well gutted[4] and pared, the better they proue.
Some laieth them croswise, along in the ground,
as high as the knee they doo couer vp round.
Some prick vp a stick in the mids of the same,
that little round hillock the better to frame.
Some maketh a hollownes, halfe a foot deepe,
with fower sets in it, set slant wise a steepe:
One foot from another, in order to lie,
and thereon a hillock, as round as a pie.
Five foot from another ech hillock would stand,
as straight as a leaueled line with the hand.
Let euerie hillock be fower foot wide,
the better to come to on euerie side.
By willowes[E275] that groweth thy hopyard without,
and also by hedges thy meadowes about.
Good hop hath a pleasure to climbe and to spred,
if Sunne may haue passage to comfort hir bed.
[Sidenote: Hop tools.]
Get crowe made of iron, deepe hole for to make,
with crosse ouerthwart it, as sharpe as a stake.
A hone[5] and a parer, like sole of a boote,[6]
to pare away grasse and to raise vp the roote.
[Sidenote: Graffing.]
In March is good grafting, the skilfull doo knowe,
so long as the wind in the East doo not blowe.
From Moone being changed til past be the prime,[7]
for grafting and cropping is verie good time.
Things graffed or planted,[8] the greatest and least,
defend against tempest, the bird[9] and the beast.
Defended shall prosper, the tother is lost,
the thing with the labour, the time and the cost.
[Sidenote: Sowing of barlie.]
Sowe barlie in March, in April and Maie,
the latter[10] in sand, and the sooner in claie.[11]
What worser for barlie than wetnes and cold?
what better to skilfull than time to be bold?[E276]
13[12]
Who soweth his barlie too soone or in raine,
of otes[13] and of thistles shall after complaine.
I speake not of Maie weed,[E277] cockle[E278] and such,
that noieth the barlie, so often and much.
Let barlie be harrowed, finelie as dust,
then workmanly trench it and fence it ye must.
This season well plied, set sowing an end,
and praise and praie God a good haruest to send.
[Sidenote: Rowling of barlie.]
Some rowleth their barlie straight after a raine,
when first it appeareth to leauell it plaine.
The barlie so vsed, the better doth growe,
and handsome ye make it at haruest to mowe.
Otes, barlie and pease, harrow after you sowe,[14]
for rie harrow first, as alreadie ye knowe.[E279]
Leaue wheat little clod, for to couer the head,
that after a frost, it may out and go spread.
17[15]
If clod in thy wheat wil not breake with the frost,
if now ye doo rowle it, it quiteth the cost.
But see when ye rowle it, the weather be drie,
or else it were better vnrowled to lie.
[Sidenote: ¶ Gardening.]
In March and in April,[16] from morning to night,
in sowing and setting, good huswiues delight:
To haue in a garden, or other like plot,
to turn vp their house, and to furnish their pot.
[Sidenote: ¶]
The nature of flowers dame Physick doth shew,
she teacheth them all to be knowne to a few.
To set or to sowe, or else sowne to remoue,
how that should be practised, learne if ye loue.
[Sidenote: To know good land.]
Land falling or lieng full South or southwest,
for profit by tillage is lightly the best.
So garden with orchard and hopyard I finde,
that want the like benefit, growe out of kinde.
[Sidenote: ¶]
If field to beare corne a good tillage doth craue,
what thinke ye of garden, what garden would haue?
In field without cost[E280] be assured of weedes,
in garden be suer thou loosest thy seedes.
[Sidenote: ¶]
At spring (for the sommer) sowe garden ye shall,
at haruest (for winter) or sowe not at all.
Oft digging, remoouing, and weeding (ye see),
makes herbe the more holesome and greater to bee.
[Sidenote: ¶]
Time faire, to sowe or to gather be bold,
but set or remooue when the weather is cold.[17]
Cut all thing or gather, the Moone in the wane,
but sowe in encreasing, or giue it his bane.
[Sidenote: ¶]
Now set doo aske watering with pot or with dish,
new sowne doo not so, if ye doo as I wish.[E281]
Through cunning with dible, rake, mattock, and spade,
by line and by leauell, trim garden is made.
Who soweth too lateward, hath seldome good seed,
who soweth too soone, little better shall speed.
Apt time and the season so diuers to hit,
let aier and laier[18] helpe practise and wit.
[Sidenote: ¶]
26[19]
Now leekes are in season, for pottage full good,
and spareth the milchcow and purgeth the blood.
These hauing, with peason for pottage in Lent,
thou sparest both otemell and bread to be spent.[E282]
[Sidenote: ¶]
Though neuer so much a good huswife doth care,
that such as doe labour haue husbandlie fare.
Yet feed them and cram them til purse doe lack chinke,
no spoone meat, no bellifull, labourers thinke.
[Sidenote: Destroie pie, rooks, and rauens nest, etc.]
Kill crowe, pie and cadow, rooke, buzard and rauen,
or else go desire them to seeke a new hauen.
In scaling the yoongest, to pluck off his beck,
beware how ye climber, for breaking your neck.
Thus endeth Marches husbandrie.
[1] "The Retailer now sells them for 2¾d. the Quart."--T.R. 1710.
[2] In Lent, dog's meat was scarce, and "a mort Lamb now and then was
very apt to whet their appetite for Mutton."--T.R.
[3] goeler. 1577. goodlier. 1614. "The goeler is the yellower, which
are the best setts, old roots being red."--T.R.
[4] "Well taken off from the old Roots."--T.R.
[5] "A common Rubber or Whetstone."--T.R.
[6] "The best, in my minde, are those triangular ones used by the Fen
men and Bankers."--T.R. 1710.
[7] cf. _ante_, ch. 36, st. 4.
[8] plainted. 1577.
[9] "That impudent bird, a Tomtit, is not easily frighted."--T.R.
[10] "later."--T.R.
[11] "Barley is rarely sown in Clay, at present."--T.R. 1710.
[12] St. 13 is not in 1577.
[13] Gervase Markham says: "You shall take care that in your seede
Barly there be not any Oates, for although they be in this case amongst
Husbandmen accounted the best of weede, yet are they such a disgrace,"
etc.;... and he adds that "some grounds will ... bring forth naturally
a certaine kinde of wilde Oates."--_English Husbandman_, Pt. I. ch. v.
[14] "That is, in our Countryman's Phrase, ... above furrow, that is
upon land after the last ploughing."--T.R. Cf. _ante_, ch. 37, st. 6.
[15] St. 17 is not in 1577.
[16] In March, April, and May. 1577.
[17] "There is an old Sawe to this purpose:
"'In Gard'ning never this Rule forget,
To Sow dry, and Set wet.'"--T.R.
[18] "By _Aier_ I understand Situation, Weather, etc.... By _Laier_,
Composition, the Nature of the Soil, Heart of the Land, etc."--T.R.
[19] Sts. 26 and 27 are not in 1577; but instead--
Good peason and leekes, to make porredge in lent,
and pescods in July, saue fish to be spent.
Those hauing with other things plentifull than,
thou winnest the hart of the labouring man.
47.
¶ _Aprils abstract.
Chap._ 37.
1[1]
Some champions laie
to fallow in Maie.
When tilth plows breake,
poore cattle cries creake.
One daie er ye plow,
spred compas ynow.
Some fodder buieth,
in fen where it lieth.
Thou champion wight,
haue cow meat for night.
Set hop his pole,
make déepe the hole.
First, bark go and sell,
er timber ye fell.
Fence copie in,
er heawers begin.
The straightest ye knowe,
for staddles let growe.
Crab trée preserue,
for plough to serue.
Get timber out,
er yéere go about.
Som cuntries lack plowmeat,
and som doe want cowmeat.
Small commons and bare,
yéelds cattell ill fare.
Som common with géese,
and shéepe without fléese.
Som tits thither bring,
and hogs without ring.
Some champions agrée
as waspe doth with bée.
Get swineherd for hog,
but kill not with dog.
Wher swineherd doth lack,
corne goeth to wrack.
All goes to the Deuill,
where shepherd is euill.
Come home from land,
with stone in hand.
Man cow prouides,
Wife dairie guides.
Slut Cisley vntaught
hath whitemeat[E283] naught.
Some bringeth in gaines,
some losse beside paines.
Run Cisse, fault known,[2]
with more than thine own,
Such Mistris, such Nan,
such Maister, such Man.
Thus endeth Aprils abstract, agréeing with Aprils husbandrie.
* * * In 1577 st. 11 is followed by sts. 20, 21, 22; then follows--
Such Mistres such Nan,
such master such man.
By such ill gestes,
poore Cis il restes.
Such fautes as thease
good dame will ease.
These faultes all ten,
abhorreth all men.
A warning for Cysse
for doing amysse.
[1] Sts. 1-5 are not in 1577.
[2] cf. _post_, ch. 48, st. 21.
48.
¶ _Aprils husbandrie.
Chap._ 38.
Swéete April showers,
Doo spring Maie flowers.
Forgotten month past,
Doe now at the last.
1[1]
In Cambridge shire forward to Lincolne shire way,
the champion maketh his fallow in May.
Then thinking so dooing one tillage woorth twaine,
by forcing of weede, by that meanes to refraine.
If April be dripping, then doo I not hate,
(for him that hath little) his fallowing late,
Else otherwise fallowing timelie is best,
for sauing of cattel, of plough and the rest.
Be suer of plough to be readie at hand,
er compas ye spred that on hillocks did stand:
Least drieing so lieing, doo make it decaie,
er euer much water doo wash it awaie.
Looke now to prouide ye of meadow for hay,
if fennes be vndrowned, there cheapest ye may.[2]
In fen for the bullock, for horse not so well,
count best the best cheape,[E284] wheresoeuer ye dwell.
Prouide ye of cowmeate, for cattel at night,
and chiefly where commons lie far out of sight:
Where cattel lie tied without any meat,
that profit by dairie can neuer be great.
[Sidenote: Put poles to your hophils.]
Get into thy hopyard with plentie of poles,
amongst those same hillocks deuide them by doles.
Three poles to a hillock[3] (I pas not how long)[4]
shall yeeld thee more profit, set deeplie and strong.
[Sidenote: Felling of timber.]
Sell barke to the tanner er timber yee fell,
cut lowe by the ground[5] or else doo ye not well.
In breaking[6] saue crooked, for mill and for ships,
and euer in hewing saue carpenters chips.[E285]
First see it well fenced er hewers begin,
then see it well stadled,[7][E286] without and within;
Thus being preserued and husbandlie donne,
shall sooner raise profit, to thee or thy sonne.
[Sidenote: Stadling of woods.]
Leaue growing for stadles the likest and best,
though seller and buier dispatched the rest.
In bushes, in hedgerowe, in groue, and in wood,
this lesson obserued is needfull and good.
Saue elme, ash and crabtree, for cart and for plough,
saue step for a stile, of the crotch of the bough.
Saue hazel for forks, saue sallow for rake,
saue huluer[8] and thorne, thereof flaile for to make.
[Sidenote: Discharge thy woods.]
Make riddance of carriage, er yeere go about,
for spoiling of plant that is newlie come out.
To carter (with oxen) this message I bring,
leaue oxen abrode[9] for anoieng the spring.[E287]
12[10]
Allowance of fodder some countries doo yeeld,
as good for the cattel as haie in the feeld.
Some mowe vp their hedlonds[11] and plots among corne,
and driuen to leaue nothing, vnmowne, or vnshorne.
Some commons are barren, the nature is such,
and some ouer laieth the common too much.
The pestered commons small profit doth geeue,
and profit as little some reape I beleeue.
Some pester the commons, with iades and with geese,
with hog without ring and with sheepe without fleese.
Some lose a daie labour with seeking their owne,
some meet with a bootie they would not haue knowne.[E288]
Great troubles and losses the champion sees,[12]
and euer in brauling, as wasps among bees:
As charitie that waie appeereth but small,
so lesse be their winnings, or nothing at all.
Where champion wanteth[E289] a swineherd for hog,
there many complaineth of naughtie mans dog.
Where ech his owne keeper appoints without care,
there corne is destroied er men be aware.
The land is well harted with helpe of the fold,
for one or two crops, if so long it will hold.
If shepherd would keepe them from stroieng of corne,
the walke of his sheepe might the better be borne.
Where stones be too manie, annoieng thy land,
make seruant come home with a stone in his hand.
By daily so dooing, haue plentie yee shall,
both handsome for pauing and good for a wall.
[Sidenote: ¶ Dairie matters.]
From April beginning, till Andrew be past,
so long with good huswife, hir dairie doth last.
Good milchcow and pasture, good husbands prouide,
the resdue good huswiues knowes best how to guide.
[Sidenote: ¶ Ill huswiferie.]
Ill huswife vnskilful to make hir owne chees,
through trusting of others hath this for hir fees.
Her milke pan and creame pot, so slabbered and sost,
that butter is wanting and cheese is halfe lost.
[Sidenote: ¶]
Where some of a cow doo raise yeerelie a pound,
with such seelie huswiues no penie is found.
Then dairie maid (Cisley) hir fault being knowne,
away apace trudgeth, with more than hir owne.
[Sidenote: ¶ Ill huswiues saiengs.]
Then neighbour, for Gods sake, if any you see,
good seruant for dairie house, waine[13] her to mee.[E290]
Such maister such man,[E291] and such mistris such maid,
such husband and huswife, such houses araid.[14]
[2] "Now ye may see what medows are well laid up, and what not, and
accordingly chuse your ground."--T.R.
[3] "I suppose in our Author's time they made the Hills less than they
do now."--T.R. 1710.
[4] "Overpoling (especially in height) is worse than underpoling."--T.R.
[5] "Six inches at the but may be more worth than two foot in another
part."--T.R.
[6] "Sawing out; it being called breaking-up by workmen in those parts
near where our Author lived."--T.R.
[7] "To stadle a Wood is to leave at certain distances a sufficient
number of young Trees to replenish it."--T.R.
[8] "or Holly ... heavy enough for flail swingels."--T.R.
[9] T.R. reads "leave not oxe abroad," and explains spring to mean the
young buds of felled underwood.
[10] Sts. 12 to 18 are not in 1577.
[11] "The laying of headlands for grass is frequently used in Norfolk
to this day."--T.R. 1710.
[12] "Our Author liv'd in the Reigns of King Henry the Eighth, King
Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth: during which time
there were several commotions about the taking in of Common Field
Land.... The greatest part of the privileges of Common Fields,
etc., are but so many privileges to wrong and quarrel with their
neighbours."--T.R.
[13] waynes, 1573 (M.); wayne. 1577
[14] and house is araid. 1573 (M.); "such houses arayde." 1577.
49.
¶ _A lesson for dairie maid Cisley, of ten toppings gests._[E292]
(a)
As wife that will
good husband plese,
Must shun with skill
such gests as these.
(b)
So Cisse that serues
must marke this note,
What fault deserues
a brushed cote.
[Sidenote: ¶ Ten toppings gests vnsent for.]
(c)
Gehezie, Lots wife, and Argusses eies,[E293]
Tom piper, poore Cobler, and Lazarus thies,
Rough Esau, with Mawdlin, and Gentils that scrall,
With Bishop that burneth, thus knowe ye them all.[1]
(d)
_These toppingly gests be in number but ten,
As welcome in dairie as Beares among men.
Which being descried, take heede of[2] you shall,
For danger of after claps, after that fall._
[Sidenote: ¶ White and drie.]
Gehezie his sicknes was whitish and drie,
such cheeses, good Cisley, ye floted[3] too nie.[E294]
[Sidenote: Too salt.]
Leaue Lot with her piller (good Cisley) alone,
much saltnes in whitemeat is ill for the stone.
[Sidenote: Full of eies.]
If cheeses in dairie haue Argusses eies,
tell Cisley the fault in hir huswiferie lies.[4][E295]
[Sidenote: Houen.]
Tom Piper hath houen and puffed vp cheekes,
if cheese be so houen, make Cisse to seeke creekes.[E296]
[Sidenote: Tough.]
Poore Cobler he tuggeth his leatherlie trash,
if cheese abide tugging, tug Cisley a crash.[E297]
[Sidenote: Full of spots.]
If Lazer[5] so lothsome in cheese be espied,
let baies amend Cisley, or shift hir aside.[E298]
[Sidenote: Full of heares.]
Rough Esau was hearie from top to the fut,
if cheese so appeareth, call Cisley a slut.[E299]
[Sidenote: Full of whey.]
As Mawdlin wept, so would Cisley be drest,
for whey in hir cheeses, not halfe inough prest.
[Sidenote: Full of gentils.]
If gentils be scrauling, call magget the py,[E300]
if cheeses haue gentils, at Cisse by and by.
[Sidenote: Burnt to the pan.]
Blesse Cisley (good mistris) that Bishop doth ban
for burning the milke of hir cheese to the pan.[E301]
[11]
_If thou (so oft beaten)[6]
Amendest by this:
I will no more threaten,
I promise thee Cis._
[12]
Thus dairie maid Cisley, rehearsed ye see,
what faults with ill huswife, in dairie house bee.
Of market abhorred, to houshold a griefe,
to maister and mistris, as ill as a thiefe.
Thus endeth Aprils husbandrie.
[1] With bishop that turneth and burneth up all. 1573 (M.) and 1577.
[2] if. 1577.
[3] "Floting is taking off the Cream."--T.R.
[4] "Because she did not work the Curd well together."--T.R.
[5] "An inner corruption.... Chiefly occasioned from their using milk
soon after calving."--T.R.
[6]
Amend so oft beaten
for doing amisse. 1577.
50.
¶ _Maies abstract.
Chap._ 39.
Put lambe from eawe,
to milke a feawe.
Be not too bold,
to milke and to fold.
Fiue eawes alow,
to euerie cow.
Shéepe wrigling taile
hath mads without faile.
Beat hard in the réede
where house hath néede.
Leaue cropping from May
to Mihelmas day.
Let Iuie be killed,
else trée will be spilled.
Now threshers warne
to rid the barne.
Be suer of hay
till thend of May.
Let shéepe fill flanke,
where corne is too ranke.
In woodland leuer,[1]
in champion neuer.
To wéeding away,
as soone as yée may.
For corne here réede,[E302]
what naughtie wéede.
Who wéeding slacketh,
good husbandrie lacketh.
Sowe buck or branke,
that smels so ranke.
Thy branke go and sowe,
where barlie did growe.
The next crop wheat
is husbandrie neat.
Sowe pescods some,
for haruest to come.
Sowe hemp and flacks,
that spinning lacks.
Teach hop to clime,
for now it is time.
Through fowles & wéedes
poore hop ill spéedes.
Cut off or crop
superfluous hop:
The titters or tine
makes hop to pine.[2]
Some raketh their wheat,
with rake that is great.
So titters and tine
be gotten out fine.
Now[3] sets doe craue
some wéeding to haue.
Now draine as ye like
both fen and dike.
Watch bées in May,
for swarming away.
Both now and in June,
marke maister bées tune.
Twifallow thy land,
least plough else stand.
No longer tarrie,
out compas to carrie.
Where néede doth pray it,
there sée ye lay it.
Set Jack and Jone
to gather vp stone.
To grasse with thy calues,
take nothing to halues.[E303]
Be suer thy neat
haue water and meat.
By tainting of ground,
destruction is found.
Now carrege get
home fewell to fet.
Tell fagot and billet
for filching gillet.[E304]
In sommer for firing
let citie be buying.
Marke colliers packing
least coles be lacking.
(Sée opened sack)
for two in a pack.
Let nodding patch
go sléepe a snatch.
Wife as[4] you will,
now plie your still.
Fine bazell[5] sowe,
in a pot to growe.
Fine séedes sowe now,
before ye sawe how.
Kéepe ox from cow,
for causes ynow.
Thus endeth Maies abstract, agréeing with Maies husbandrie.
¶ Two other short remembrances.
[36]
From bull cow fast
till Crowchmas[6] be past.
From heifer bul hid thée
till Lammas[7] doth bid thée.
Here ends Maies short remembrances.
* * * Sts. 14, 15, 19, are not in 1577.
[1] euer. 1577.
[2] now take out fine. 1577.
[3] New. 1577.
[4] yf. 1577.
[5] Bezell. 1577.
[6] Saint Helens daie (_side note_).
[7] August (_side note_).
51.
_Maies husbandrie.
Chap._ 40.
Cold Maie and windie,
Barne filleth vp finelie.
Forgotten month past,
Doe now at the last.
[Sidenote: Essex and Suffolke.]
At Philip and Jacob,[E305] away with the lams
that thinkest to haue any milke of their dams.
At Lammas leaue milking, for feare of a thing:
least (_requiem æternam_) in winter they sing.
[Sidenote: Milking of eawes.]
To milke and to fold them is much to require,
except yee haue pasture to fil their desire.
Yet manie by milking (such heede they doo take),
not hurting their bodies much profit doo make.
[Sidenote: ¶]
Fiue eawes to a cow, make a proofe by a score,
shall double thy dairie, else trust me no more.
Yet may a good huswife that knoweth the skill,
haue mixt and vnmixt at hir pleasure and will.
If sheepe or thy lambe fall a wrigling with taile,
go by and by search it, whiles helpe may preuaile:
That barberlie handled[E306] I dare thee assure,
cast dust in his arse, thou hast finisht thy cure.
Where houses be reeded[1] (as houses haue neede),
now pare off the mosse, and go beat in the reed.
The iuster ye driue it, the smoother and plaine,
more handsome ye make it to shut off the raine.
[Sidenote: Leaue off cropping.]
[Sidenote: Destroie Iuie.]
From Maie til October leaue cropping, for why?
in wood sere, whatsoeuer thou croppest wil dy.
Where Iuie imbraceth the tree verie sore,
kill Iuie, or else tree wil addle no more.[E307]
Keepe threshing for thresher, til Maie be come in,
to haue to be suer fresh chaffe in the bin.
And somewhat to scamble, for hog and for hen,
and worke when it raineth for loitering men.[E308]
[Sidenote: Count store no sore.]
Be sure of haie and of prouender some,
for labouring cattel til pasture be come.
And if ye doo mind to haue nothing to sterue,
haue one thing or other, for all thing to serue.
Ground compassed wel and a following[2] yeare,
(if wheat or thy barlie too ranke doo appeare)
Now eat it with sheepe or else mowe it ye may,
for ledging, and so, to the birds for a pray.
[Sidenote: ¶ Wéeding.]
In Maie get a weede hooke, a crotch and a gloue,[E309]
and weed out such weedes as the corne doth not loue:
For weeding of winter corne now it is best,
but June is the better for weeding the rest.
[Sidenote: Ill wéeds.]
The May weed doth burn[E310] and the thistle doth freat,[E311]
the fitchis[3] pul downward,[E312] both rie and the wheat.
The brake and the cockle[E313] be noisome too much,
yet like vnto boddle[E314] no weede there is such.
[Sidenote: ¶]
Slack neuer thy weeding, for dearth nor for cheape,
the corne shall reward it er euer ye reape.
And specially where ye doo trust for to seede,[4]
let that be well vsed, the better to speede.
[Sidenote: Sowing of branke.]
In Maie is good sowing, thy buck[E315] or thy branke,[E316]
that black is as pepper, and smelleth so ranke.
It is to thy land, as a comfort or muck,
and al thing it maketh as fat as a buck.
14[5]
Sowe buck after barlie, or after thy wheat,
a peck to a roode (if the measure be great);
Three earthes see ye giue it, and sowe it aboue,
and harrow it finelie if buck ye doo loue.
Who pescods would gather, to haue with the last,
to serue for his houshold till haruest be past,
Must sowe them in Maie, in a corner ye shal,
where through so late growing no hindrance may fal.[E317]
[Sidenote: ¶ Sowing of flax and hempe.]
Good flax and good hemp for to haue of hir owne,
in Maie a good huswife will see it be sowne.
And afterward trim it, to serue at a neede,
the fimble to spin and the karl for hir seede.[E318]
Get into the hopyard, for now it is time,[6]
to teach Robin hop on his pole how to clime:
To follow the Sunne, as his propertie is,[E319]
and weede him and trim him, if aught go amis.
[Sidenote: Ill neighbours to the hop.]
Grasse, thistle and mustard seede, hemlock and bur,
tine, mallow and nettle, that keepe such a stur.
With peacock and turkie, that nibbles off top,
are verie ill neighbors to seelie poore hop.
From wheat go and rake out the titters or tine,
if eare be not foorth, it will rise againe fine.
Use now in thy rie, little raking or none,
breake tine[7] from his roote, and so let it alone.[E320]
[Sidenote: Wéeding of quickset.]
Bankes newly quicksetted, some weeding doo craue,
the kindlier nourishment thereby to haue.
Then after a shower to weeding a snatch,
more easilie weede with the roote to dispatch.
[Sidenote: Now draine ditches.]
The fen and the quamire,[8][E321] so marrish be kind,
and are to be drained, now wine to thy mind:
Which yeerelie vndrained and suffered vncut,
annoieth the meadowes that thereon doo but.
[Sidenote: ¶ Swarming of bées.]
Take heede to thy bees, that are readie to swarme,
the losse thereof now is a crownes worth of harme:[9]
Let skilfull be readie and diligence seene,
least being too careles, thou losest thy beene.
[Sidenote: Twifallowing.]
In Maie at the furthest, twifallow thy land,
much drout may else after cause plough for to stand:
This tilth being done, ye haue passed the wurst,
then after who ploweth, plow thou with the furst.
[Sidenote: Carie out compas.]
Twifallow once ended, get tumbrell and man,
and compas that fallow as soone as ye can.
Let skilfull bestow it, where neede is vpon,
more profit the sooner to follow[10] thereon.
Hide hedlonds with muck, if ye will to the knees,
so dripped and shadowd with bushes and trees:[E322]
Bare plots full of galles,[11] if ye plow ouerthwart,
and compas it then, is a husbandlie part.
Let children be hired, to lay to their bones,
from fallow as needeth to gather vp stones.
What wisedome for profit aduiseth vnto,
that husband and huswife must willingly do.
[Sidenote: Forth to grasse with thy calues.]
To gras with thy calues in some medow plot nere,
where neither their mothers may see them nor here.
Where water is plentie and barth to sit warme,
and looke well vnto them, for taking of harme.
[Sidenote: Let not cattel want water.]
Pinch neuer thy wennels of water or meat,
if euer ye hope for to haue them good neat:
In Sommer time dailie, in Winter in frost,
if cattel lack drinke, they be vtterly lost.
[Sidenote: Ouerlay not thy pastures.]
For coueting much ouerlay not thy ground,
and then shall thy cattel be lustie and sound.
But pinch them of pasture, while Sommer doth last,
and lift at their tailes er an Winter be past.[E323]
[Sidenote: Get home thy fewel.]
Get home with thy fewell, made readie to fet,
the sooner the easier carrege to get:
Or otherwise linger the carrege thereon,
till (where as ye left it) a quarter be gon.
[Sidenote: Husbandrie for Citizens.]
His firing in Sommer, let Citizen buie,
least buieng in Winter make purse for to crie.
For carman and collier harps both on a string,
in Winter they cast to be with thee to bring.[12]
[Sidenote: Sléeping time.[E324]]
From Maie to mid August, an hower or two,
let patch[E325] sleepe a snatch, how soeuer ye do,
Though sleeping one hower refresheth his song,
yet trust not hob growthed[E326] for sleeping too long.
[Sidenote: ¶ Stilling of herbes.]
The knowledge of stilling is one pretie feat,
The waters be holesome, the charges not great.[E327]
What timelie thou gettest, while Sommer doth last,
thinke Winter will helpe thee, to spend it as fast.
[Sidenote: ¶]
Fine bazell desireth it may be hir lot,
to growe as the gilloflower, trim in a pot,
That ladies and gentils, for whom she doth serue,
may helpe hir as needeth, poore life to preserue.[13]
Keepe oxe fro thy cow that to profit would go,
least cow be deceiued by oxe dooing so:
And thou recompenced for suffering the same,
with want of a calfe and a cow to wax lame.
Thus endeth Maies husbandrie.
[1] "Reeding is no where so well done as in Norfolk and Suffolk.... It
will bear a better slope than any other thatch."--T.R.
[2] See footnote 10, below.
[3] "or, as some call it, the Tine-tare."--T.R.
[4] to for seed. 1577.
[5] Sts. 14 and 15 are not in 1577.
[6] "I am told that 20_s._ an acre is the common Price for looking
after a hop ground."--T.R.
[7] Misprinted "time."
[8] quamer. 1577.
[9] "The Proverb says, 'A Swarm in May is worth a Load of Hay.'"--T.R.
1710. Mavor says a swarm might fetch 15_s._ in his time (1812).
[10] The author of _Tusser Redivivus_ and Mavor prefer _fallow_; though
M. says that all standard editions read _follow_. Cf. st. 9, above.
[11] gales. 1577.
[12] "In our Author's time, and not long since, the Yarmouth and
Ipswich Colliers were laid up in the Winter, and then the Spring Market
was always dearest."--T.R.
[13] "Most people stroak Garden Basil, which leaves a grateful Smell
on the Hand; and he will have it, that such stroaking from a fair lady
preserves the life of the Basil."--T.R.
52.
¶ _Junes abstract.
Chap._ 41.
Wash shéep for to share,
that shéepe may go bare.
Though fléese ye take,
no patches make.
Share lambes no whit,
or share not yit.
If meadow be growne,
let meadow be mowne.
Plough early ye may,
and then carrie hay.
Tis good to be knowne,
to haue all of thine owne.
Who goeth a borrowing,
goeth a sorrowing.[E328]
Sée cart in plight,
and all things right.
Make drie ouer hed,
both houell and shed.
Of houell make stack,
for pease on his back.
10[1]
In champion some,
wants elbow rome.
Let wheat and rie,
in house lie drie.
Buie turfe and sedge,
or else breake hedge.
Good store howse néedfull
well ordred spéedfull.
Thy barnes repaire,
make flower[2] faire.
Such shrubs as noie,
in sommer destroie.
Swinge brembles & brakes,[E329]
get forkes and rakes.
Spare hedlonds[3] some,
till haruest come.
Cast ditch and pond,
to lay vpon lond.
_A lesson of hopyard._
Where hops will growe,
here learne to knowe.
Hops many will coome,
in a roode of roome.
Hops hate the land,
with grauell and sand.
The rotten mold
for hop is worth gold.
The sunne southwest
for hopyard is best.
Hop plot once found,
now dig the ground.
Hops fauoreth malt,
hops thrift doth exalt:
Of hops more réede,
as time shall néede.
Thus endeth Junes abstract, agreeing with Junes husbandrie.
[1] Sts. 10-12 are omitted in 1577.
[2] _Query_, floor.
[3] hedlong. 1577.
53.
¶ _Junes husbandrie.
Chap._ 42.
Calme weather in June
Corne sets in time.
Forgotten month past,
Doe now at the last.
[Sidenote: Shéepe sharing.]
Wash sheepe (for the better) where water doth run,
and let him go cleanly and drie in the sun.
Then share him and spare not, at two daies an end,
The sooner the better his corps will amend.[E330]
[Sidenote: Beware of euill shéepe shearers.]
Reward not thy sheepe (when ye take off his cote)
with twitchis and patches, as brode as a grote.[E331]
Let not such vngentlenesse happen to thine,
least flie with hir gentils doo make it to pine.
[Sidenote: Sheare lambes in Julie.]
Let lambes go vnclipped, till June be halfe worne,
the better the fleeses will growe to be shorne.
The Pie will discharge thee for pulling the rest:[E332]
the lighter the sheepe is, then feedeth it best.
[Sidenote: Mowing time.]
If meadow be forward, be mowing of some;
but mowe as the makers may well ouercome:[E333]
Take heede to the weather, the wind and the skie,
if danger approcheth, then cock apace[E334] crie.
Plough earlie till ten a clock, then to thy hay,
in plowing and carting, so profit ye may.
By little and little, thus dooing ye win:
that plough shall not hinder when haruest comes in.[E335]
Prouide of thine owne to haue all things at hand,
least worke and the workman vnoccupide stand.
Loue seldome to borowe that thinkest to saue,
for he that once lendeth twise looketh to haue.[E336]
[Sidenote: Trim well thy carts.]
Let cart be well searched without and within,
well clouted and greased, er hay time begin.
Thy hay being carried, though carter had sworne,
carts bottome well boorded is sauing of corne.
Good husbands that laie to saue all things vpright,
for tumbrels and cart, haue a shed readie dight.
Where vnder the hog may in winter lie warme:
to stand so enclosed, as wind doo no harme.
[Sidenote: A houell is set vpon crotches[1] and couered
with poles and strawe.]
So likewise a houell will serue for a roome,
to stack on the peason, when haruest shall coome.
And serue thee in winter, more ouer than that,
to shut vp thy porklings thou mindest to fat.
10[2]
Some barnroome haue little, and yardroome as much,
yet corne in the field appertaineth to such:
Then houels and rikes they are forced to make,
abrode or at home for necessities sake.
Make sure of breadcorne (of all other graine),
lie drie and well looked to, for mouse and for raine.
Though fitchis and pease, and such other as they,
(for pestring too much) on a houell ye ley.
With whinnes or with furzes thy houell renew,
for turfe or for sedge, for to bake and to brew:
For charcole and sea cole, as also for thacke,
for tallwood and billet, as yeerlie ye lacke.
[Sidenote: The husbandlie storhouse.]
What husbandlie husbands, except they be fooles,
but handsome haue storehouse, for trinkets and tooles:
And all in good order, fast locked to ly,
what euer is needfull, to find by and by.
Thy houses and barnes would be looked vpon,
and all things amended er haruest come on.
Things thus set in order, in quiet and rest,
shall further thy haruest and pleasure thee best.
The bushes and thorne with the shrubs that do noy,
in woodsere[3][E337] or sommer cut downe to destroy:
But where as decay to the tree ye will none,
for danger in woodsere, let hacking alone.
[Sidenote: Mowe downe brakes and meadow.]
At Midsommer, downe with the brembles and brakes,
and after, abrode with thy forks and thy rakes:
Set mowers a mowing, where meadow is growne,
the longer now standing the worse to be mowne.
[Sidenote: Mowe hedlonds at haruest or after in the
seueral fields.]
Now downe with the grasse vpon hedlonds about,
that groweth in shadow, so ranke and so stout.
But grasse vpon hedlond of barlie and pease,
when haruest is ended, go mowe if ye please.
Such muddie deepe ditches, and pits in the feeld,
that all a drie sommer no water will yeeld,
By fieing[E338] and casting that mud vpon heapes,
commodities many the husbandman reapes.
_A lesson where and when to plant good Hopyard._
Whome fancie persuadeth, among other crops,
to haue for his spending, sufficient of hops,[E339]
Must willinglie follow, of choises to chuse,
such lessons approoued, as skilfull doo vse.
[Sidenote: Naught for hops.]
Ground grauellie, sandie, and mixed with clay,
is naughtie for hops any maner of way;
Or if it be mingled with rubbish and stone,
for drines and barrennes, let it alone.
[Sidenote: Good for hops.]
Choose soile for the hop of the rottenest mould,
well doonged and wrought, as a garden plot should
Not far from the water (but not ouerflowne)
this lesson well noted is meete to be knowne.
The Sunne in the south, or else southly and west,
is ioy to the hop, as a welcomed gest;
But wind in the north, or else northly east,
to hop is as ill as a fraie in a feast.
[Sidenote: Now dig thy new hop ground.]
Meete plot for a hopyard once found as is told,
make thereof account, as of iewell of gold.
Now dig it and leaue it, the Sunne for to burne,
and afterward fence it, to serue for that turne.
[Sidenote: The praise of hops.]
The hop for his profit I thus doo exalt,
it strengtheneth drinke, and it fauoreth malt.
And being well brewed, long kept it will last,
and drawing abide, if ye drawe not too fast.
[1] "forked posts."--T.R.
[2] Sts. 10-12 are omitted in 1577.
[3] goodsere. 1577.
54.
¶ _Julies abstract.
Chap._ 43.
Go sirs and away,
to ted and make hay.
If stormes drawes nie,
then cock apace crie.
Let hay still bide,
till well it be dride.
(Hay made) away carrie,
no longer then tarrie.
Who best way titheth,
he best way thriueth.
Two good hay makers
woorth twentie crakers.
Let dallops[1] about
be mowne and had out.
Sée hay doo looke gréene,
sée féeld ye rake cléene.
Thry fallow I pray thée,
least thistles bewray thée.
Cut off, good wife,
ripe beane with a knife.
Ripe hempe out cull,
from karle to pull.
Let séede hempe growe,
till more ye knowe.
Drie flax get in,
for spinners[2] to spin.
Now mowe[3] or pluck
thy branke or buck.
Some wormewood saue,
for March to haue.
Mark Physick true,
of wormewood and rue.[4]
Get grist to the mill,
for wanting at will.[E340]
Thus endeth Julies abstract, agréeing with Julies husbandrie.
[1] dalors. 1577.
[2] mayde. 1577.
[3] Go reape. 1577.
[4]
Some woormwood saue
for March to haue. 1577.
55.
¶ _Julies husbandrie.
Chap._ 44.
No tempest, good Julie,
Least corne lookes rulie.
Forgotten month past,
Doe now at the last.
[Sidenote: Hay haruest.]
Go muster thy seruants, be captaine thy selfe,
prouiding them weapon and other like pelfe.
Get bottles and walletts, keepe field in the heat,
the feare is as much, as the danger is great.
With tossing and raking and setting on cox,
grasse latelie in swathes is hay for an ox:[E341]
That done, go and cart it and haue it away,
the battel is fought, ye haue gotten the day.
[Sidenote: Pay thy tithes.]
Pay iustly thy tithes whatsoeuer thou bee,
that God may in blessing send foison to thee.
Though Vicar[1] be bad, or the Parson as euill,
go not for thy tithing thy selfe to the Deuill.
Let hay be well made, or auise else auouse,[E342]
for molding in goef,[2] or of firing the house.
Lay coursest aside for the ox and the cow,
the finest for sheepe and thy gelding alow.
Then downe with the hedlonds, that groweth about,
leaue neuer a dallop vnmowne and had out.
Though grasse be but thin, about barlie and pease,
yet picked vp cleane ye shall find therein ease.
[Sidenote: Thry fallowing.]
Thry fallow[E343] betime, for destroieng of weede,
least thistle and duck[3] fall a blooming and seede,
Such season may chance, it shall stand thee vpon,
to till it againe, er an Sommer be gon.
[Sidenote: ¶ Gathering of garden beanes.]
Not rent[4] off, but cut off, ripe beane with a knife,
for hindering stalke of hir vegetiue life.
So gather the lowest, and leaning the top,
shall teach thee a trick, for to double thy crop.[E344]
[Sidenote: ¶ Gather yellow hempe.]
Wife, pluck fro thy seed hemp the fiemble hemp clene,
this looketh more yellow, the other more grene:
Vse ton for thy spinning, leaue Mihel the tother,
for shoo thred and halter, for rope and such other.[E345]
[Sidenote: ¶]
9[5]
Now pluck vp thy flax, for the maidens to spin,
first see it dried, and timelie got in.
And mowe vp thy branke, and away with it drie,
and howse it vp close, out of danger to lie.
[Sidenote: ¶ Wormewood get against fleas and infection.]
While wormwood[E346] hath seed, get a handful or twaine,
to saue against March to make flea to refraine:
Where chamber is sweeped, and wormwood is strowne,
no flea for his life dare abide to be knowne.
11[6]
What sauer is better (if physick be true),
for places infected, than wormwood and rue.
It is as a comfort for hart and the braine,
and therefore to haue it, it is not in vaine.
[Sidenote: ¶ Be sure of bread and drinke for haruest.]
Get grist to the mill, to haue plentie in store,
least miller lack water, as many doo more.[E347]
The meale the more yeeldeth, if seruant be true,
and miller that tolleth, take none but his due.
Thus endeth Julies husbandrie.
[1] curat. 1577.
[2] mow. 1614.
[3] dock. 1577.
[4] rend. 1573 (M.), 1577.
[5] St. 9 wanting in 1577.
[6] St. 11 wanting in 1577.
56.
¶ _Augusts abstract.
Chap._ 45.
Thry fallowing won,
get compassing don.
In June and in Awe
swinge brakes (for a lawe).
Pare saffron plot,
forget it not.
His dwelling made trim,
looke shortly for him:
When haruest is gon,
then saffron comes on.
A little of ground
brings saffron a pound.
The pleasure is fine,
the profit is thine.
Kéepe colour in drieng,
well vsed woorth buieng.
5[1]
Maids, mustard séed reape,
and laie on a heape.
Good neighbors in déede,
change séede for séede.
Now strike vp drum,[2]
cum haruest man cum.
Take paine for a gaine,
one knaue mars twaine.[E348]
Reape corne by the day,[3]
least corne doo decay.
By great is the cheaper,
if trustie were reaper.
Blowe horne for sleapers,
and chéere vp thy reapers.[4]
Well dooings who loueth,
thes haruest points proueth.
Paie Gods part furst,
and not of the wurst.[E349]
Now Parson (I say),[5]
tith carrie away.
Kéepe cart gap wéele,
scare hog from whéele.
14[6]
Mowe hawme to burne,
to serue thy turne:
To bake thy bread,
to burne vnder lead.
Mowne hawme being dry,
no longer let ly.
Get home thy hawme,
whilst weather is cawme.
Mowne barlie lesse cost,
ill mowne much lost.
Reape barlie with sickle,
that lies in ill pickle.[7]
Let gréenest stand,
for making of band.
Bands made without dew,
will hold but a few.
Laie band[8] to find her,
two rakes[9] to a binder.
Rake after sieth,
and pay thy tieth.
Corne carried all,
then rake it ye shall.
Let shock take sweate,
least gofe take heate.
Yet it is best reason,
to take it in season.[E350]
More often ye turne,
more pease ye out spurne.
Yet winnow them in,
er carrege begin.
Thy carting plie,
while weather is drie.
Bid gouing (clim)[10]
goue iust and trim.
Laie wheat for séede,
to come by at néede.
Séede barelie cast,
to thresh out last.
Lay pease vpon stacke,
if houell ye lack.
And couer it straight,
from doues that waight.
Let gleaners gleane,
(the poore I meane).
Which euer ye sowe,
that first eate lowe.
The other forbare,
for rowen[11] to spare.
Come home lord singing,
com home[12] corne bringing.[E351]
Tis merie in hall,
when[13] beards wag all.[E352]
Once had thy desire,
pay workman his hire.
Let none be beguilde,
man, woman, nor childe.
Thanke God[14] ye shall,
and adue for all.
_Works after haruest._[15]
Get tumbrell in hand,
for barlie land.
The better the muck,
the better good luck.
Still carrege is good,
for timber and wood.
No longer delaies,
to mend the high waies.
Some loue as a iewell,
well placing of fewell.
In piling of logs,
make houell for hogs.
Wife, plow doth crie,
to picking of rie.
Such séede as ye sowe,
such reape or else mowe.
Take shipping or ride,
Lent stuffe to prouide.
Let haberden lie,
in peasestraw drie.
When out ye ride,
leaue a good guide.
Some profit spie out,
by riding about.
Marke now, thorow yéere,
what cheape, what déere.
Some skill doth well
to buie and to sell.
Of théefe who bieth,
in danger lieth.
Commoditie knowne,
abrode is blowne.
At first hand bie,
at third let lie.
Haue monie prest,
to buie at the best.
Some cattle home bring,
for Mihelmas spring.[E353]
By hauke and hound,
small profit is found.
Dispatch, looke home,
to loitring mome.
Prouide or repent,
milch cow for Lent.
Now crone[16] your sheepe,
fat those ye kéepe.
Leaue milking old cow,
fat aged vp now.
Sell butter and chéese,
good Faires few léese.
At Faires go bie,
home wants to supplie.
If hops looke browne,
go gather them downe.
But not in the deaw,
for piddling with feaw.
Of hops this knack,
a meanie doo lack.[17]
Once had thy will,[18]
go couer his hill.
Take hop to thy dole,
but breake not his pole.
Learne here (thou stranger)
to frame hop manger.
Hop poles preserue,
againe to serue.
Hop poles by and by,
long safe vp to dry.
Least poles wax scant,
new poles go plant.[19]
The hop kell dride,
will best abide.
Hops dried in loft,
aske tendance oft.
And shed their séedes,
much more than néedes.[20]
Hops dride small cost,
ill kept halfe lost.
Hops quickly[21] be spilt,
take héede if thou wilt.
Some come, some go,
This life is so.
Thus endeth Augusts abstract, agréeing with Augusts husbandrie.
* * * Stanza 47 is st. 49 in Septembers Abstract in 1577; st. 48 is 50,
second couplet reads--
But not in a deawe,
nor pidling with feawe. 1577.
[1] Sts. 5, 6 are wanting in 1577.
[2] droom. 1577.
[3] Get reapers by day. 1577.
[4] giue gloues to, etc. 1573 (M.) and 1577.
[5] That parson may. 1577.
[6] Sts. 14, 15, are wanting in 1577.
[7]
Reape barley with hand,
that will not stand. 1577.
[8] hand. 1577.
[9] rakers. 1577.
[10] In 1577, Bid goeuing clim. _Query_, abbreviation for Clement.
[11] rewen. 1577.
[12] cart. 1573 (M.), 1577.
[13] let. 1577.
[14] so. 1577.
[15] The Works after Haruest are not in editions previous to 1580 (M.).
But stanzas 47 and 48 are in Septembers Abstract. 1577.--Ed.
[16] _i.e._ pick out the crones.--T.R., but cf. Glossary.
[17] put in thy pack. 1577.
[18] fyll. 1577.
[19] ley new to plant. 1577.
[20] The third couplet is omitted in 1577.
[21] soone. 1577.
57.
¶ _Augusts husbandrie.
Chap._ 46.
Dry August and warme,
Doth haruest no harme.
Forgotten month past
Doe now at the last.
Thry fallow once ended, go strike by and by,
both wheat land and barlie, and so let it ly.
And as ye haue leisure, go compas the same,
when vp ye doo lay it, more fruitfull to frame.
[Sidenote: Mowing of brakes.]
Get downe with thy brakes, er an showers doo come,
that cattle the better may pasture haue some.
In June and in August, as well doth appeere,
is best to mowe brakes, of all times in the yeere.
[Sidenote: Paring of saffron.]
Pare saffron[E354] betweene the two S. Maries daies,[E355]
or set or go shift it, that knowest the waies.
What yeere shall I doo it (more profit to yeeld?)
the fourth in garden, the third in the feeld.
[Sidenote: ¶ Huswiferie.]
In hauing but fortie foote workmanly dight,
take saffron ynough for a Lord and a knight.
All winter time alter[1] as practise doth teach,
what plot haue ye better, for linnen to bleach.[2]
[Sidenote: ¶]
5[3]
Maides, mustard seede gather, for being too ripe,[E356]
and weather it well, er ye giue it a stripe:[4]
Then dresse it and laie it in soller vp sweete,
least foistines make it for table vnmeete.
[Sidenote: ¶]
6[5]
Good huswifes in sommer will saue their owne seedes,
against the next yeere, as occasion needes.
One seede for another, to make an exchange,
with fellowlie neighbourhood seemeth not strange.
[Sidenote: Corne harvest.]
Make sure of reapers, get haruest in hand,
the corne that is ripe, doo[6] but shed as it stand.
Be thankfull to God, for his benefits sent,
and willing to saue it with earnest intent.
[Sidenote: Champion by great, the other by day.]
To let out thy haruest, by great[7] or by day,
let this by experience leade thee a way.
By great will deceiue thee, with lingring it out,
by day will dispatch, and put all out of dout.[E357]
Grant haruest lord[8][E358] more by a penie or twoo,
to call on his fellowes the better to doo:
Giue gloues to thy reapers,[9] a larges[E359] to crie,
and dailie to loiterers haue a good eie.
[Sidenote: Good haruest points.]
Reape wel, scatter not, gather cleane that is shorne,
binde fast, shock apace, haue an eie to thy corne.
Lode safe, carrie home, follow time being faire,
goue iust in the barne, it is out of despaire.
11[10]
Tithe dulie and trulie, with hartie good will,
that God and his blessing may dwell with thee still:
Though Parson neglecteth his dutie for this,
thanke thou thy Lord God, and giue erie man his.
[Sidenote: Parson looke to thy tithe.]
Corne tithed (sir Parson) to gather go get,
and cause it on shocks to be by and by set:
Not leauing it scattering abrode on the ground,
nor long in the field, but away with it round.
[Sidenote: Kéepe hog from cart whéele.]
To cart gap and barne, set a guide to looke weele,
and hoy out (sir carter) the hog fro thy wheele:
Least greedie of feeding, in following cart,
it noieth or perisheth, spight of thy hart.
In champion countrie a pleasure they take,
to mowe vp their hawme, for to brew and to bake.
And also it stands them in steade of their thack,
which being well inned, they cannot well lack.
The hawme is the strawe of the wheat or the rie,
which once being reaped, they mowe by and bie:
For feare of destroieng with cattle or raine,
the sooner ye lode it, more profit ye gaine.
[Sidenote: Mowing of barlie.]
The mowing of barlie, if barlie doo stand,
is cheapest and best, for to rid out of hand:[E360]
Some mowe it and rake it, and sets it on cocks,
some mowe it and binds it, and sets it on shocks.
[Sidenote: Binding of barlie.]
Of barlie the longest and greenest ye find,
leaue standing by dallops,[E361] till time ye doo bind:
Then early in morning (while deaw is thereon),
to making of bands till the deaw be all gon.
[Sidenote: Spreading of barlie bands.]
[Sidenote: ¶]
One spreadeth those bands, so in order to ly,
as barlie (in swatches) may fill it thereby:
Which gathered vp, with the rake and the hand,
the follower after them bindeth in band.
[Sidenote: Tithe of rakings.]
Where barlie is raked (if dealing be true),
the tenth of such raking to Parson is due:
Where scatring of barlie is seene to be much,
there custome nor conscience tithing should gruch.[11]
Corne being had downe (any way ye alow),
should wither as needeth, for burning in mow:
Such skill appertaineth to haruest mans art,
and taken in time is a husbandly part.
[Sidenote: Usage of peason.]
No turning of peason till carrege ye make,
nor turne in no more, than ye mind for to take:
Least beaten with showers so turned to drie,
by turning and tossing they shed as they lie.
[Sidenote: Lingring Lubbers.]
If weather be faire, and tidie[12][E362] thy graine,
make speedily carrege, for feare of a raine:
For tempest and showers deceiueth a menie,
and lingering lubbers loose many a penie.
[Sidenote: Best maner of gouing corn in the barn.]
In gouing at haruest, learne skilfully how
ech graine for to laie, by it selfe on a mow:
Seede barlie the purest, goue out of the way,
all other nigh hand goue as just as ye may.
[Sidenote: Pease stack.]
Stack pease vpon houell abrode in the yard,
to couer it quicklie, let owner regard:
Least Doue and the cadow, there finding a smack,[E363]
with ill stormie weather doo perish[E364] thy stack.
[Sidenote: Leaue gleaning for the poore.]
Corne carred, let such as be poore go and gleane,
and after, thy cattle to mowth it vp cleane.
Then spare it for rowen, till Mihel be past,
to lengthen[E365] thy dairie no better thou hast.
In haruest time, haruest folke, seruants and all,
should make all togither good cheere in the hall:
And fill out the black boule of bleith[E366] to their song,
and let them be merie all haruest time long.
[Sidenote: Pay trulie haruest folke.]
Once ended thy haruest, let none be begilde,
please such as did helpe thee, man, woman, and childe.
Thus dooing, with alway such helpe as they can,
thou winnest the praise of the labouring man.
[Sidenote: Thanke God for all.]
Now looke vp to Godward, let tong neuer cease
in thanking of him, for his mightie encrease:
Accept my good will, for a proofe go and trie:
the better thou thriuest, the gladder am I.
[End of Augusts Husbandry in 1577.]
_Works after Haruest._[13]
Now carrie out compas, when haruest is donne,
where barlie thou sowest, my champion sonne:
Or laie it on heape, in the field as ye may,
till carriage be faire, to haue it away.
Whose compas is rotten and carried in time,
and spred as it should be, thrifts ladder may clime.[E367]
Whose compas is paltrie and carried too late,
such husbandrie vseth that many doo hate.[E368]
[Sidenote: Carriage of fewell.]
31[14]
Er winter preuenteth, while weather is good,
for galling of pasture get home with thy wood.
And carrie out grauell to fill vp a hole:
both timber and furzen, the turfe and the cole.
[Sidenote: Well placing of fewell.]
Howse charcole and sedge, chip and cole[15] of the land,
pile tallwood and billet, stacke all that hath band.
Blocks, rootes,[16] pole and bough, set vpright to the thetch:
the neerer more handsome in winter to fetch.
[Sidenote: Houell for hogs.]
In stacking of bauen, and piling of logs,
make vnder thy bauen a houell for hogs,
And warmelie enclose it, all sauing the mouth,
and that to stand open, and full to the south.
Once haruest dispatched, get wenches and boies,
and into the barne, afore all other toies.
Choised seede to be picked and trimlie well fide,
for seede may no longer from threshing abide.
Get seede aforehand, in a readines had,
or better prouide, if thine owne be too bad.
Be carefull of seede, or else such as ye sowe,
be sure at haruest, to reape or to mowe.
[Sidenote: Provision for Lent.]
36[17]
When haruest is ended, take shipping or ride,
Ling,[E369] Saltfish and Herring, for Lent to prouide.
To buie it at first, as it commeth to rode,
shall paie for thy charges thou spendest abrode.
Choose skilfullie Saltfish, not burnt at the stone,[18]
buie such as be good, or else let it alone.
Get home that is bought, and goe stack it vp drie,
with peasestrawe betweene it, the safer to lie.
[Sidenote: Compassing of barlie land.]
Er euer ye iornie, cause seruant with speede
to compas thy barlie land where it is neede.
One aker well compassed, passeth some three,
thy barne shall at haruest declare it to thee.
This lesson is learned by riding about,
the prices of vittels, the yeere thorough out.
Both what to be selling and what to refraine,
and what to be buieng, to bring in againe.[E370]
Though buieng and selling doth woonderfull well,
to such as haue skill how to buie and to sell:
Yet chopping and changing I cannot commend,
with theefe[19] and his marrow, for feare of ill end.
The rich in his bargaining needes not be tought,
of buier and seller full far is he sought.
Yet herein consisteth a part of my text,
who buieth at first hand, and who at the next.
[Sidenote: Buieng at first hand.]
At first hand he buieth that paieth all downe,
at second, that hath not so much in the towne,
At third hand he buieth that buieth of trust,
at his hand who buieth shall paie for his lust.[E371]
[Sidenote: Readie monie bieth best cheape.]
As oft as ye bargaine, for better or wurse,
to buie it the cheaper, haue chinkes in thy purse
Touch kept is commended, yet credit to keepe,
is paie and dispatch him, er euer ye sleepe.
[Sidenote: Hauking.]
Be mindfull abrode of Mihelmas[20] spring,
for thereon dependeth a husbandlie thing:
Though some haue a pleasure, with hauke vpon hand,
good husbands get treasure, to purchase their land.
[Sidenote: Winter milch cow.]
Thy market dispatched, turne home againe round,
least gaping for penie, thou loosest[21] a pound:
Prouide for thy wife, or else looke to be shent,
good milch cow for winter, another for Lent.
[Sidenote: Old ewes.]
In traueling homeward, buie fortie good crones,
and fat vp the bodies of those seelie bones.
Leaue milking and drie vp old mulley thy cow,
the crooked and aged, to fatting put now.
[Sidenote: Buieng or selling of butter and chéese.]
47[22]
At Bartilmewtide, or at Sturbridge faire,[E372]
buie that as is needfull, thy house to repaire:
Then sell to thy profit, both butter and cheese,
who buieth it sooner, the more he shall leese.
[Sidenote: Hops gathering.]
If hops doo looke brownish, then are ye too slowe,
if longer ye suffer those hops for to growe.
Now sooner ye gather, more profit is found,
if weather be faire and deaw of a ground.
[Sidenote: Increasing of hops.]
Not breake off, but cut off, from hop the hop string,
leaue growing a little againe for to spring.
Whose hill about pared, and therewith new clad,
shall nourish more sets against March to be had.
[Sidenote: The order of hops gathering.]
Hop hillock discharged of euerie let,
see then without breaking, ech pole ye out get.
Which being vntangled aboue in the tops,
go carrie to such as are plucking of hops.
[Sidenote: Hop manger.]
Take soutage or haier (that couers the kell),
set like to a manger and fastened well:
With poles vpon crotchis as high as thy brest,
for sauing and[23] riddance is husbandrie best.[E373]
[Sidenote: Saue hop poles.]
Hops had, the hop poles that are likelie preserue,
(from breaking and rotting) againe for to serue:
And plant ye with alders or willowes a[24] plot,
where yeerelie as needeth mo poles may be got.
[Sidenote: Drieng of hops.]
Some skilfullie drieth their hops on a kell,
and some on a soller, oft turning them well.
Kell dried will abide, foule weather or faire,
where drieng and lieng in loft doo dispaire.
[Sidenote: Kéeping of hops.]
Some close them vp drie in a hogshed or fat,
yet canuas or soutage is better than that:
By drieng and lieng they quickly be spilt:
thus much haue I shewed, doo now as thou wilt.
Old fermer is forced long August to make,
his goodes at more leisure away for to take.
New fermer he thinketh ech houre a day,
vntill the old fermer be packing away.[E374]
Thus endeth and holdeth out Augusts husbandrie, till Mihelmas Eue.
Tho. Tusser.
[1] after. 1577.
[2] "Saffron makes a very good Sward, whereon Linnen may lye hollow and
bleach well enough."--T.R.
[3] Stanza 5 is wanting in 1573 (M.) and 1577.
[4] "Beating it upon a Hurdle or some other rough thing."--T.R.
[5] St. 6 is wanting in 1573 (M.) and 1577.
[6] doth. 1614.
[7] "Our Author is justly against letting Harvest by the great, for
whoever does will certainly find himself cheated or slighted."--T.R.
[8] "Some stay'd sober working man, who understands all sorts of
Harvest Work."--T.R. Cf. Matt. ix. 38.
[9] "Where the Wheat is thistly."--T.R.
[10] Stanzas 11, 14, and 15 are not in 1577.
[11] "This alludes to the custom of Norfolk, where the Parson takes his
Tyth in the Swarth, the Farmer also clears the Swarths, and afterwards
with a Drag-Rake rakes his ground all over."--T.R.
[12] "Tidy is an old Word signifying neat, proper, or in Season, from
the word Tide."--T.R.
[13] Not in editions previous to 1580 (M.). Portions are in Septembers
Husbandry 1577.--_Ed_.
[14] Stanzas 31-33 are in Septembers Husbandry. 1577.
[15] turfe. 1577.
[16] Block rootes. 1577.
[17] Sts. 36-46 appear as sts. 25-35 in Septembers Husbandry. 1577.
[18] "Such Fish as is dry'd on the Beach in too hot Weather."--T.R.
[19] knaue. 1577.
[20] Mighelmas. 1577.
[21] lossest. 1577.
[22] Sts. 47-54 occur as sts. 49-56 of Septembers Husbandry. 1577.
[23] of. 1577.
[24] some. 1577.
58.
¶ _Corne Haruest equally deuided into ten partes.
Chap._ 47.[1]
One part cast forth, for rent due out of hand,[E375]
One other part, for seede to sowe thy land.
Another part, leaue Parson for his tieth.
Another part for haruest, sickle and sieth.
One part for plowwrite, cartwrite, knacker and smith,
One part to vphold thy teemes that drawe therewith.
One part for seruant and workmans wages lay.
One part likewise for filbellie day by day.
[Sidenote: For naperie sope and candle, salt and
sauce, tinker[2] and cooper, brasse and pewter.]
One part thy wife for needfull things doth craue.
Thy selfe and childe, the last one part would haue.
[11]
Who minds to cote,
vpon this note,
may easily find ynough:
What charge and paine,
to litle gaine,
doth follow toiling plough.
[12]
Yet fermer may
thanke God and say,
for yeerlie such good hap:
Well fare the plough,[E376]
that sends ynough
to stop so many a gap.
[1] This chapter is wanting in 1573 (M.); but is in 1577.
[2] timber. 1577.
59.
¶ _A briefe conclusion, where you may see,
Ech word in the verse, to begin with a T.
Chap._ 48.
[Sidenote: Triue for contriue.]
The thriftie that teacheth the thriuing to thriue,
Teach timelie to trauerse the thing that thou triue.
Transferring thy toiling, to timelines tought.
This teacheth thee temprance, to temper thy thought.
Take trustie (to trust to) that thinkest to thee,
That trustily thriftines trowleth to thee.
Then temper thy trauell to tarie the tide,
This teacheth thee thriftines twentie times tride.
Take thankfull thy talent, thanke thankfully those
That thriftilie teacheth thy time to transpose.
Troth twise to thee teached, teach twentie times ten.
This trade thou that takest, take thrift to thee then.[E377]
[Thomas Tusser (1577).]
60.
[_Mans age deuided into twelue seauens._ 1614.]
¶ Mans age deuided here ye haue,
By prentiships, from birth to his graue.
_Chap._ 49.
7 _The first seuen yeers bring vp as a childe,_[E378]
14 _The next to learning, for waxing too wilde._
21 _The next keepe vnder sir hobbard de hoy,_
28 _The next a man no longer a boy._
35 _The next, let lustie laie wisely to wiue,_
42 _The next, laie now or else neuer to thriue._
49 _The next, make sure for terme of thy life,_
56 _The next, saue somewhat for children and wife._
63 _The next, be staied, giue ouer thy lust,_
70 _The next, thinke hourely whither thou must._
77 _The next, get chaire and crotches to stay,_
84 _The next, to heauen God send vs the way._
Who looseth their youth, shall rue it in age:
Who hateth the truth, in sorowe shall rage.
61.
¶ Another diuision of the nature of mans age.
_Chap._ 50.
The Ape, the Lion, the Foxe, the Asse,
Thus sets foorth man, as in a glasse.
[1]
Ape _Like Apes we be toieng, till twentie and one,_
Lyon _Then hastie as Lions till fortie be gone:_
Foxe _Then wilie as Foxes, till threescore and three,_
Asse _Then after for Asses accounted[1] we bee._
[2]
Who plaies with his better, this lesson must knowe,
what humblenes Foxe to the Lion doth owe.
Foxe, Ape with his toieng[E379] and rudenes of Asse,
brings (out of good hower) displeasure to passe.
[1] accompted. 1577.
62.
_Comparing good husband with vnthrift his brother,
The better discerneth the tone from the tother._[E380]
_Chap._ 51
Ill husbandrie braggeth,
to go with the best:
Good husbandrie baggeth
vp gold in his chest.
Ill husbandry trudgeth,
with vnthrifts about:
Good husbandry snudgeth,
for fear of a dout.
Ill husbandrie spendeth
abrode like a mome:
Good husbandrie tendeth
his charges at home.
Ill husbandrie selleth
his corne on the ground:
Good husbandrie smelleth
no gain that way found.
Ill husbandrie loseth,
for lack of good fence:
Good husbandrie closeth,
and gaineth the pence.
Ill husbandrie trusteth
to him and to hur:[E381]
Good husbandrie lusteth
himselfe for to stur.
Ill husbandrie eateth
himselfe out a doore:
Good husbandrie meateth
his friend and the poore.
Ill husbandrie daieth,[E382]
or letteth it lie:
Good husbandrie paieth,
the cheaper to bie.
Ill husbandrie lurketh,
and stealeth a sleepe:
Good husbandrie worketh,
his houshold to kéepe.
Ill husbandrie liueth,
by that and by this:[E383]
Good husbandrie giueth
to erie man his.
Ill husbandrie taketh,
and spendeth vp all:
Good husbandrie maketh
good shift with a small.
Ill husbandry praieth
his wife to make shift:
Good husbandrie saieth
take this of my gift.
Ill husbandry drowseth
at fortune so auke:
Good husbandrie rowseth
himselfe as a hauke.
Ill husbandrie lieth
in prison for debt:
Good husbandrie spieth
where profit to get.
Ill husbandrie waies
has to fraud what he can
Good husbandrie praies
hath of euerie man.
Ill husbandrie neuer
hath welth to keep touch
Good husbandrie euer
hath penie in pouch.
[17]
Good husband his boone,
Or request hath a far.
Ill husband assoone
Hath a tode with an R.[E384]
63.
¶ _A comparison betweene Champion countrie and seuerall.
Chap._ 52.
The countrie[1] enclosed I praise,
the tother delighteth not me,
For nothing the wealth it doth raise,
to such as inferior be.
How both of them partly I knowe,
here somewhat I mind for to showe.[2]
[Sidenote: Champion.]
There swineherd that keepeth the hog,
there neatherd, with cur and his horne,
There shepherd with whistle and dog,
be fence to the medowe and corne.
There horse being tide on a balke,
is readie with theefe for to walke.
Where all thing in common doth rest,
Though common ye doo for the best,
There common as commoners vse,
for otherwise shalt thou not chuse.[3]
What laier much better then there,
or cheaper (thereon to doo well?)
What drudgerie more any where
lesse good thereof where can ye tell?
What gotten by Sommer is seene:
in Winter is eaten vp cleene.
Example by Leicester shire,
what soile can be better than that?
For any thing hart can desire,
and yet doth it want ye see what.
Mast, couert, close pasture, and wood,
and other things needfull as good.
[Sidenote: Enclosure.]
All these doo enclosure bring,
experience teacheth no lesse,
I speake not to boast of the thing,
but onely a troth to expresse.
Example (if doubt ye doo make):
by Suffolke and Essex go take.[E385]
[Sidenote: Seuerall.]
More plentie of mutton and biefe,
corne, butter, and cheese of the best,
More wealth any where (to be briefe),
more people, more handsome and prest,
Where find ye? (go search any coast)
More worke for the labouring man,
as well in the towne as the feeld:
Or thereof (deuise if ye can)
more profit what countries doo yeeld?
More seldome where see ye the poore,
go begging from doore vnto doore?
[Sidenote: Champion countrie.]
In Norfolke behold the dispaire
of tillage too much to be borne:
By drouers from faire to faire,
and others destroieng the corne.
By custome and couetous pates,
by gaps, and by opening of gates.[4][E386]
What speake I of commoners by,
with drawing all after a line:
So noieng the corne, as it ly,
with cattle, with conies,[5] and swine.
When thou[6] hast bestowed thy cost,
looke halfe of the same to be lost.
The flocks of the Lords of the soile
do yeerly the winter corne wrong:
The same in a manner they spoile,
with feeding so lowe and so long.
And therefore that champion feeld
doth seldome good winter corne yeeld.
[Sidenote: Champion noiances.]
12[7]
By Cambridge a towne I doo knowe,
where many good husbands doo dwell;
Whose losses by losels doth showe,[E387]
more here than is needfull to tell:
Determine at court what they shall,
performed is nothing at all.[E388]
The champion robbeth by night,
and prowleth and filcheth by day:
Himselfe and his beast out of sight,
both spoileth and maketh away
Not onely thy grasse, but thy corne,
both after, and er it be shorne.
Pease bolt with thy pease he will haue,
his houshold to feede and his hog:
Now stealeth he, now will he craue,
and now will he coosen and cog.
In Bridewell a number be stript,
lesse woorthie than theefe to be whipt.[E389]
The oxboy, as ill is as hee,
or worser, if worse may be found:
For spoiling from thine and from thee,
of grasse and of corne on the ground.
Laie neuer so well for to saue it,
by night or by daie he will haue it.
What orchard vnrobbed escapes?
or pullet dare walke in their jet?
But homeward or outward (like apes)
they count it their owne they can get.
Lord, if ye doo take them,[E390] what sturs!
how hold they togither like burs!
For commons these commoners crie,
enclosing they may not abide:
a cow with hir calfe by hir side.
Nor laie not to liue by their wurke,
but theeuishlie loiter and lurke.
The Lord of the towne is to blame,
for these and for many faults mo.[E391]
For that he doth knowe of the same,
yet lets it vnpunished go.
Such Lords ill example doth giue,
where verlets[E392] and drabs so may liue.
What footpathes are made, and how brode!
annoiance too much to be borne:
is made thorow erie mans corne!
Where champions ruleth the roste,[E393]
there dailie disorder is moste.
Their sheepe when they driue for to wash,
how careles such sheepe they doo guide!
The fermer they leaue in the lash,
with losses on euerie side.
Though any mans corne they doo bite,
they will not alow him a mite.
What hunting and hauking is there!
corne looking for sickle at hand:
Actes lawles to doo without feare,
how yeerlie[8] togither they band.
More harme to another to doo,
than they would be done so vntoo.
More profit is quieter found
(where pastures in seuerall bee:)
Of one seelie aker of ground,
than champion maketh of three.
Againe what a ioie is it knowne,
when men may be bold of their owne!
[Sidenote: Champion.]
[Sidenote: Seuerall.]
The tone is commended for graine,
yet bread made of beanes they doo eate:
The tother for one loafe haue twaine,
of mastlin, of rie, or of wheate.
The champion liueth full bare,
when woodland full merie doth fare.
[Sidenote: Champion.]
[Sidenote: Seuerall.]
Tone giueth his corne in a darth,
to horse, sheepe, and hog euery daie;
The tother giue cattle warme barth,
and feede them with strawe and with haie.
Corne spent of the tone so in vaine:
the tother doth sell to his gaine.
[Sidenote: Champion.]
[Sidenote: Seuerall.]
Tone barefoote and ragged doth go,
and readie in winter to sterue:
When tother ye see doo not so,
but hath that is needfull to serue.
Tone paine in a cotage doth take,
when tother trim bowers doo make.
[Sidenote: Champion.]
[Sidenote: Seuerall.]
Tone laieth for turfe and for sedge,
and hath it with woonderfull suit:
When tother in euerie hedge,
hath plentie of fewell and fruit.
Euils twentie times worser than thease,
enclosure quickly would ease.
[Sidenote: Seuerall.]
In woodland the poore men that haue
scarse fully two akers of land,
More merily liue and doo saue,
than tother with twentie in hand.
Yet paie they as much for the twoo
as tother for twentie must doo.
The labourer comming from thence,
in woodland to worke any where:
(I warrant you) goeth not hence,
to worke anie more againe there.
If this same be true (as it is:)
why gather they nothing of this?
The poore at enclosing doo grutch,
because of abuses that fall,
Least some man should haue but too much,
and some againe nothing at all.
If order might therein be found,
what were to the seuerall ground?
Thus endeth Husbandry. 1577.
Here followeth Huswifery. 1573.
* * * "It is likely this was wrote soon after Ket's rebellion, as a
dissuasive from the like, and to persuade the poorer sort quietly to
endure Enclosures."--T.R.
[1] countery. 1577.
[2]
Because of them both I do know
I mind thereof somewhat to show. 1577.
[3]
There common as commoners do,
As good else to cobble a shoe. 1573 (M.) and 1577.
[4] "In Norfolk (in our Author's time) there was a considerable
Rebellion, call'd Ket's Rebellion against Inclosures, and to this
day they take the Liberty of throwing open all Enclosures out of the
Common Field, these are commonly call'd Lammas Lands, and half Year
Lands."--T.R.
[5] sheep and with swine. 1577.
[6] one. 1577.
[7] Stanzas 12-21 are not in 1577.
[8] _Query_, yarely.
64.
¶ _The description of an enuious and naughtie neighbour.[E394]
Chap._ 53.[1]
An enuious neighbour is easie to finde,
His cumbersome fetches are seldome[2] behinde.
His hatred procureth from naughtie to wurse,
His friendship like Iudas that carried the purse.[E395]
His head is a storehouse, with quarrels full fraught,
His braine is vnquiet, till all come to naught.
His memorie pregnant, old euils to recite,
His mind euer fixed each euill to requite.
His mouth full of venim, his lips out of frame,[E396]
His tongue a false witnes, his friend to defame.
His eies be promooters, some trespas to spie,
His eares be as spials,[E397] alarum to crie.
His hands be as tyrants, reuenging ech thing,
His feete at thine elbow, as serpent to sting.
His breast full of rancor, like Canker[3] to freat,
His hart like a Lion, his neighbour to eat.
His gate like a sheepebiter,[E398] fleering aside,
His looke like a coxcombe,[E399] vp puffed with pride.
His face made of brasse, like a vice in a game,
His iesture like Dauus,[E400] whom Terence doth name.
His brag as Thersites,[E401] with elbowes abrode.
His cheekes in his furie shall swell like a tode.[E402]
His colour like ashes, his cap in his eies,
His nose in the aire, his snout in the skies.
His promise to trust to as slipprie[4] as ice,
His credit much like to the chance of the dice.
His knowledge or skill is in prating[5] too much,
His companie shunned,[6] and so be all such.
His friendship is counterfait, seldome to trust,
His dooings vnluckie and euer vniust.
His fetch is to flatter, to get what he can,
His purpose once gotten, a pin[7] for thee than.
[1] This chapter precedes the Author's Life in 1577 edition.
[2] sieldome. 1614.
[3] Coprus. 1577.
[4] slipper. 1577.
[5] parting. 1577.
[6] shenned. 1577.
[7] penny. 1577.
[In the edition of 1577 the following piece is inserted here.]
64.*
_To light a candell before the Deuill._[E403]
To beard thy foes shews forth thy witt,
but helpes the matter nere a whit.
My sonne, were it not worst
to frame thy nature so,
That as thine vse is to thy friend,
likewise to greet thy foe:
Though not for hope of good,
yet for the feare of euill,
Thou maist find ease so proffering vp
a candell to the deuill.
This knowne, the surest way
thine enemies wrath to swage;
If thou canst currey fauour thus,
thou shalt be counted sage.
Of truth I tell no lye,
by proofe to well I knowe,
The stubborne want of only this
hath brought full many lowe.
And yet to speak the trouth
the Deuill is worse then naught,
That no good turne will once deserue,
yet looketh vp so haught.
Exalt him how we please,
and giue him what we can,
Yet skarcely shall we find such Deuill
a truly honest man.
But where the mighty may
of force the weake constraine,
It shal be wysely doone to bow
to voyd a farther payne,
Like as in tempest great,
where wind doth beare the stroke,
Much safer stands the bowing reede
then doth the stubborne oke.
And chiefly when of all
thy selfe art one of those
That fortune needes, will haue to dwell
fast by the Deuils nose:
Then (though against thine hart)
thy tongue thou must so charme
That tongue may say, where ere thou come
the Deuill doth no man harme.
For where as no reuenge
may stand a man in steede,
As good is then an humble speech,
as otherwise to bleede.
Like as ye see by him
that hath a shrew to wife,
As good it is to speak her faire
as still to liue in strife.
Put thou no Deuill in boote
as once did master Shorne:[E404]
Take heede as from madde bayted bull
to keepe thee fro his horne.
And where ye see the Deuill
so bold to wrest with lawe,
Make _congé_ oft, and crouch aloofe,
but come not in his clawe.
The scholer forth of schoole
may boldlier take his mind,
The fields haue eyes, the bushes eares,
false birds can fetch the wind.[E405]
The further from the gone
the safer may ye skippe,
The nerer to the carters hand
the nerer to the whippe.
The neerer to the whippe
the sooner comes the jerke,
The sooner that poore beast is strucke
the sooner doth he yerke.
Some loueth for to whippe,
to see how ierkes will smart,
In wofull taking is that horse
that nedes must drawe in cart.
Such fellow is the Deuell,
that doth euen what he list,
Yet thinketh he what ere he doth
none ought dare say, but whist.
Take therefore heed, my sonne,
and marke full well this song,
Learne thus with craft to claw the deuell,
else liue in rest not long.
65.
¶ _A sonet against a slanderous tongue._[E406]
¶ _Chap._ 54.
Doth darnell good, among the flowrie wheat?
Doo thistles good, so thick in fallow spide?
Doo taint wormes good, that lurke where ox should eat
Or sucking drones, in hiue where bees abide?
Doo hornets good, or these same biting gnats?
Foule swelling toades, what good by them is seene?
In house well deckt, what good doth gnawing rats?
Or casting mowles, among the meadowes greene?
Doth heauie newes make glad the hart of man?
Or noisome smels, what good doth that to health?
Now once for all, what good (shew who so can?)
Doo stinging[1] snakes, to this our Commonwealth?
_No more doth good a peeuish slanderous toung,
But hurts it selfe, and noies both old and young._[E407]
[1] stinking. 1577.
66.
¶ _A sonet vpon the Authors first seuen yeeres seruice.
Chap._ 55.
Seuen times hath Janus[E408] tane new yéere by hand,
Seuen times hath blustring March blowne forth his powre:
To driue out Aprils buds, by sea and land,
For minion Maie, to deck most trim with flowre.
Seuen times hath temperate Ver,[E409] like pageant plaide,
And pleasant Æstas eke hir flowers told:
Seuen times Autumnes heate hath béene delaide,[E410]
With Hyems boistrous blasts, and bitter cold.
Seuen times the thirtéene Moones[E411] haue changed hew,
Seuen times the Sunne his course hath gone about:
Seuen times ech bird hir nest hath built anew,
Since first time you to serue, I choosed out.
_Still yours am I, though thus the time hath past,
And trust to be, as[1] long as life shall last._
[1] so. 1577.
67.
Man minded for to thriue
must wisely lay to wiue.
What hap may thereby fall
here argued find ye shall.
¶ _The Authours Dialogue betweene two Bachelers, of wiuing and
thriuing by Affirmation and Obiection._[E412]
_Chap._ 56.
_Affirmation._
[1]
Frend, where we met this other day,
We heard one make his mone and say,
Good Lord, how might I thriue?
We heard an other answere him,
Then make thee handsome, trick and trim,
And lay in time to wiue.
_Obiection._
[2]
And what of that, say you to mee?
Do you your selfe thinke that to be
The best way for to thriue?
If truth were truely bolted out,[E413]
As touching thrift, I stand in dout,
If men were best to wiue.
_Affirmation._
[3]
There is no doubt, for proue I can,
I haue but seldome seene that man
Which could the way to thriue:[E414]
Vntill it was his happie lot,
To stay himselfe in some good plot,[E415]
And wisely then to wiue.
_Obiection._
[4]
And I am of an other minde,
For by no reason can I finde,
How that way I should thriue:
For where as now I spend a pennie,
I should not then be quit with mennie,
Through bondage for to wiue.
_Affirmation._
[5]
Not so, for now where thou dost spend,
Of this and that,[E416] to no good end,
Which hindereth thee to thriue:
Such vaine expences thou shouldst saue,
And daily then lay more to haue,
As others do that wiue.
_Obiection._
[6]
Why then do folke this prouerbe put,
The blacke oxe neare trod on thy fut,[E417]
If that way were to thriue?
Hereout a man may soone picke forth,
Few feeleth what a pennie is worth,
Till such time as they wiue.
_Affirmation._
[7]
It may so chaunce as thou doest say,
This lesson therefore beare away,
If thereby thou wilt thriue:
Looke ere thou leape, see ere thou go,
It may be for thy profite so,
For thee to lay to wiue.
_Obiection._
[8]
It is too much we dailie heare,
To wiue and thriue both in a yeare,[E418]
As touching now to thriue:
I know not herein what to spie,
But that there doth small profite lie,
To fansie for to wiue.
_Affirmation._
[9]
In deede the first yeare oft is such,
That fondly some bestoweth much,
A let to them to thriue:
Yet other moe may soone be founde,
Which getteth many a faire pounde,
The same day that they wiue.
_Obiection._
[10]
I graunt some getteth more that day,
Than they can easily beare away,
Nowe needes then must they thriue:
What gaineth such thinke you by that?
A little burden, you wote what,
Through fondnesse for to wiue.
_Affirmation._
[11]
Thou seemest blinde as mo[E419] haue bin,
It is not beautie bringeth in
The thing to make thee thriue:
In womankinde, see that ye do
Require of hir no gift but two,
When ere ye minde to wiue.
_Obiection._
[12]
But two, say you? I pray you than
Shew those as briefly as you can,
If that may helpe to thriue:
I weene we must conclude anon,
Of those same twaine to want the ton,
When ere we chance to wiue.
[Sidenote: Honestie and huswiferie.]
_Affirmation._
[13]
An honest huswife, trust to mee,
Be those same twaine, I say to thee,
That helpe so much to thriue:
As honestie farre passeth golde,
So huswiferie in yong and olde,
Do pleasure such as wiue.
_Obiection._
[14]
The honestie in deede I graunt,
Is one good point the wife should haunt,
To make hir husband thriue:
But now faine would I haue you show,
How should a man good huswife know,
If once he hap to wiue?
_Affirmation._
[15]
A huswife good betimes will rise,
And order things in comelie wise,
Hir minde is set to thriue:
Vpon hir distaffe she will spinne,
And with hir needle she will winne,
If such ye hap to wiue.
_Obiection._
[16]
It is not idle going about,
Nor all day pricking on a clout,
Can make a man to thriue:
Or if there be no other winning,
But that the wife gets by hir spinning,
Small thrift it is to wiue.
_Affirmation._
[17]
Some more than this yet do shee[1] shall,
Although thy stocke be verie small,
Yet will shee helpe thee thriue:
Lay thou[2] to saue, as well as she,
And then thou shalt[3] enriched be,
When such thou hapst[4] to wiue.
_Obiection._
[18]
If she were mine, I tell thee troth,
Too much to trouble hir I were loth,
For greedines to thriue:
Least some should talke, as is the speech,
The good wiues husband weares no breech,[E420]
If such I hap to wiue.
_Affirmation._
[19]
What hurts it thee what some do say,
If honestlie she take the way
To helpe thee for to thriue?
For honestie will make hir prest,
To doo the thing that shall be best,
If such ye hap to wiue.
_Obiection._
[20]
Why did _Diogenes_ say than,
To one that askt of him time whan,
Were best to wiue to thriue?
Not yet (quoth[5] he) if thou be yong,
If thou waxe old, then holde thy tong,
It is too late to wiue.[E421]
_Affirmation._
[21]
Belike he knew some shrewish wife,
Which with hir husband made such strife,
That hindered him to thriue:
Who then may blame him for that clause,
Though then he spake as some had cause,
As touching for to wiue?
_Obiection._
[22]
Why then I see to take a shrew,
(As seldome other there be few)
Is not the way to thriue:
So hard a thing I spie it is,
The good to chuse, the shrew to mis,
That feareth me to wiue.[E422]
_Affirmation._
[23]
She may in something seeme a shrew,
Yet such a huswife as but few,
To helpe thee for to thriue:
This prouerbe looke in mind ye keepe,
As good a shrew is as a sheepe,[E423]
For you to take to wiue.
_Obiection._
[24]
Now be she lambe or be she eaw,
Giue me the sheepe, take thou the shreaw,
See which of vs shall thriue:
If she be shrewish thinke for troth,
For all her thrift I would be loth
To match with such to wiue.
_Affirmation._
[25]
Tush, farewell then, I leaue you off,
Such fooles as you that loue to scoff,
Shall seldome wiue to thriue:
Contrarie hir, as you do me,
And then ye shall, I warrant ye,
Repent ye if ye wiue.
_Obiection._
[26]
Friend, let vs both giue iustly place,
To wedded man to iudge this cace,
Which best way is to thriue:
For both our talke as seemeth plaine,
Is but as hapneth in our braine,
To will or not to wiue.
¶ _Wedded mans iudgement
Vpon the former argument._
[Sidenote: Moderator.]
[27]
As Cock that wants his mate, goes rouing all about,
With crowing early and late, to find his louer out:
And as poore sillie hen, long wanting cock to guide,
Soone droopes and shortly then beginnes to peake aside:
Euen so it is with man and wife, where gouernment is found,
The want of ton the others life doth shortly soone confound.
[28]
In iest and in earnest, here argued ye finde,
That husband and huswife togither must dwell,
And thereto the iudgement of wedded mans minde,
That husbandrie otherwise speedeth not well:
So somewhat more nowe I intende for to tell,
Of huswiferie like as of husbandrie tolde,
How huswifelie huswife helpes bring in the golde.
[1] they. 1577.
[2] you. 1577.
[3] you shall. 1577.
[4] you hap. 1577.
[5] quod. 1577.
_Thus endeth the booke of_ Husbandrie.
[Finis (1577).]
The points of Huswiferie, vnited to the comfort of Husbandrie, newly
corrected and amplified, with diuers good lessons for housholders to
recreate the Reader, as by the Table at the end hereof more plainlie
may appeere.
Set forth by Thomas Tusser Gentleman.
68.
_To the right Honorable and my especiall good Ladie and Maistres, the
Ladie Paget._[E424]
Though danger be mickle,
and fauour so fickle,
Yet dutie doth tickle
my fansie to wright:
Concerning how prettie,
how fine and how nettie,
Good huswife should iettie,[1]
from morning to night.
Not minding[2] by writing,
to kindle a spiting,
But shew by enditing,
as afterward told:
How husbandrie easeth,
to huswiferie pleaseth,
And manie purse greaseth
with siluer and gold.
For husbandrie wéepeth,
where huswiferie sléepeth,
And hardly he créepeth,
vp ladder to thrift:
That wanteth to bold him,
thrifts ladder to hold him,
Before it be told him,
he falles without shift.
Least many should feare me,
and others forsweare me,
Of troth I doo beare me
vpright as ye sée:
Full minded to looue all,
and not to reprooue all,
But onely to mooue all,
good huswiues to bée.
For if I should mind some,
or descant behind some,
And missing to find some,
displease so I mought:
Or if I should blend them,
and so to offend them,
What stur I should send them
I stand in a dought.
Though harmles ye[3] make it
and some doo well take it,
If others forsake it,
what pleasure were that?
Naught else but to paine me,
and nothing to gaine me,
But make them disdaine me
I wot ner for what.
Least some make a triall,
as clocke by the diall,
Some stand to deniall,
some murmur and grudge:
Giue iudgement I pray you,
for iustlie so may you,
So fansie, so say you,
I make you my iudge.
In time, ye shall try me,
by troth, ye shall spy me,
So finde, so set by me,
according to skill:
How euer trée groweth,
the fruit the trée showeth,[E425]
Your Ladiship knoweth,
my hart and good will.
Thogh fortune doth measure,
and I doo lacke treasure,
Yet if I may pleasure
your Honour with this:
Then will me to mend it,
or mend er ye send it,
Or any where lend it,
if ought be amis.
Your Ladiships Seruant,
_Thomas Tusser._
[1] yettie. 1557.
[2] minded. 1577.
[3] I. 1577.
69.
¶ _To the Reader._[1]
Now listen, good huswiues, what dooings are here
set foorth for a daie, as it should for a yere.
Both easie to follow, and soone to atchiue,
for such as by huswiferie looketh to thriue.[E426]
The forenoone affaires, till dinner (with some,)
then after noone dooings, till supper time come.
With breakfast and dinner time, sup, and to bed,
standes orderlie placed, to quiet thine hed.
The meaning is this, for a daie what ye see,
that monthlie and yeerlie continued must bee.
And hereby to gather (as prooue I intend),
that huswiuelie matters haue neuer an end.
I haue not, by heare say, nor reading in booke,
set out (peraduenture) that some cannot brooke,
Nor yet of a spite, to be dooing with enie,
but such as haue skared me many a penie.
If widow, both huswife and husband may be,
what cause hath a widower lesser than she?
Tis needfull that both of them looke well about:
too careles within, and too lasie without.
Now therefore, if well ye consider of this,
what losses and crosses comes dailie amis.
Then beare with a widowers pen as ye may:
though husband of huswiferie somewhat doth say.[E427]
[1] "First introduced in the edition of 1580" (M.).
70.
¶ _The Preface to the booke of Huswiferie._
Take weapon away, of what force is a man?
Take huswife from husband, and what is he than?
As louers desireth together to dwell,
So husbandrie loueth good huswiferie well.
Though husbandrie seemeth to bring in the gaines,
Yet huswiferie labours seeme equall in paines.
Some respit to husbands the weather may send,
But huswiues affaires haue neuer an end.
71.
As true as thy faith,
Thus huswiferie saith.
[Sidenote: The praise of huswiferie.]
_I serve for a daie, for a weeke, for a yere,
For life time, for euer, while man dwelleth here.
For richer, for poorer, from North to the South,
For honest, for hardhead, or daintie of mouth.
For wed and vnwedded, in sicknes and health,
For all that well liueth, in good Commonwealth.
For citie, for countrie, for Court, and for cart,
To quiet the head, and to comfort the hart.
72.
¶ _A description of Huswife and Huswiferie._[E428]
Of huswife doth huswiferie challenge that name,
of huswiferie huswife doth likewise the same,
Where husband and husbandrie ioineth with thease,
there wealthines gotten is holden with ease.
The name of a huswife what is it to say?
the wife of the house, to the husband a stay.
If huswife doth that, as belongeth to hur:
if husband be godlie,[1] there needeth no stur.
The huswife is she that to labour doth fall,
the labour of hir I doo huswiferie call.
If thrift by that labour be honestlie[2] got:
then is it good huswiferie, else is it not.
The woman the name of a huswife doth win,
by keeping hir house, and of dooings therein.
And she that with husband will quietly dwell,
must thinke on this lesson, and follow it well.
[1] wittie. 1577. Cf. _post_, ch. 100, st. 6.
[2] be sued or got. 1577.
[Finis (1577).]
73.
_Instructions to Huswiferie._[E429]
Serue God is the furst,
True loue is not wurst.
A dailie good lesson, of huswife in deede,
is God to remember, the better to speede.
An other good lesson, of huswiferie thought,
is huswife with husband to liue as she ought.
Wife comely no griefe,
Man out, huswife chiefe.
Though trickly to see to, be gallant to wiue,
yet comely and wise is the huswife to thriue.
When husband is absent, let huswife be chiefe,
and looke to their labour that eateth hir biefe.
Both out not allow,
Keepe house huswife thow.
Where husband and huswife be both out of place,
there seruants doo loiter, and reason their cace.[E430]
The huswife so named (of keeping the house,)
must tend on hir profit, as cat on the mouse.
Seeke home for rest,
For home is best.
As huswiues keepe home, and be stirrers about,
so speedeth their winnings, the yeere thorow out.
Though home be but homely, yet huswife is taught,
that home hath no fellow to such as haue aught.[E431]
¶ Vse all with skill,
Aske what ye will.
Good vsage with knowledge, and quiet withall,
make huswife to shine, as the sunne on the wall.
What husband refuseth all comely to haue,
that hath a good huswife, all willing to saue.
Be readie at neede,
All thine to feede.
The case of good huswiues, thus daily doth stand,
what euer shall chance, to be readie at hand.
This care hath a huswife all daie in hir hed,
that all thing in season be huswifelie fed.
By practise go muse,
How houshold to vse.
Dame practise is she that to huswife doth tell,
which way for to gouerne hir familie[E432] well.
Vse labourers gently, keepe this as a lawe,
make childe to be ciuill, keepe seruant in awe.
Who careles doe liue,
Occasion doe giue.
Haue euerie where a respect to thy waies,
that none of thy life any slander may raies.
What many doo knowe, though a time it be hid,
at length will abrode, when a mischiefe shall bid.
No neighbour reprooue,
Doe so to haue looue.
The loue of thy neighbour shall stand thee in steede,
the poorer, the gladder, to helpe at a neede.
Vse friendly thy neighbour, else trust him in this,
as he hath thy friendship, so trust vnto his.
¶ Strike nothing vnknowne,
Take heede to thine owne.
Reuenge not thy wrath vpon any mans beast,
least thine by like malice be bid to like feast.
What husband prouideth with monie his drudge,
the huswife must looke to, which waie it doth trudge.
74.
_A digression._
[1]
Now, out of the matter, this lesson I ad,
concerning cock crowing, what profit is had.
Experience teacheth, as true as a clock:
how winter night passeth, by marking the cock.
[2]
Cock croweth at midnight, times few aboue six,
with pause to his neighbour, to answere betwix.
At three a clock thicker, and then as ye knowe,
like all in to Mattens, neere daie they doo crowe.
[Sidenote: Cocke crowing.]
[3]
At midnight, at three, and an hower ere day,
they vtter their language, as well as they may.
Which who so regardeth what counsell they giue,
will better loue crowing, as long as they liue.
For being afraid,
Take heede good maid:
Marke crowing of cock,
For feare of a knock.
[4]
¶ _The first cock croweth._
Ho, Dame it is midnight: what rumbling is that?
The next cock croweth.[1]
Take heede to false harlots, and more, ye wot what.
If noise ye heare,
Looke all be cleare:
Least drabs doe noie thee,
And theeues destroie thee.
[5]
Maides, three a clock,[E433] knede, lay your bucks,[E434] or go brew,
The next cock croweth.
And cobble and botch, ye that cannot buie new.
Till cock crow agen,
Both maidens and men:
Amend now with speede,
That mending doth neede.[2]
[6]
Past fiue a clock, Holla: maid, sleeping beware,
The next cock croweth.
Least quickly your Mistres vncouer your bare.
Maides, vp I beseech yee,
Least Mistres doe breech yee:
To worke and away,
As fast as ye may.
[1] showeth, here and in stanzas 5 and 6. 1577.
[2]
Both mayden and man
mend now what ye can.
Leave gibber gabber
mend slibber slabber. 1577.
75.
¶ _Huswiferie._
[Now listen, good huswiues, what doings are here
set out for a day as it should for a yere. 1577.]
¶ _Morning workes._[1]
No sooner some vp,
But nose is in cup.
Get vp in the morning as soone as thou wilt,
with ouerlong slugging good seruant is spilt.
Some slouens from sleeping no sooner get vp,
but hand is in aumbrie, and nose in the cup.
That early is donne,
Count huswifely wonne.
[Sidenote: Morning workes.]
Some worke in the morning may trimly be donne,
that all the day after can hardly be wonne.
Good husband without it is needfull there be,
good huswife within as needfull as he.
Cast dust into yard,
And spin and go card.
Sluts corners auoided shall further thy health,
much time about trifles shall hinder thy wealth.
Set some to peele hempe or else rishes to twine,
to spin and to card, or to seething of brine.
Grind mault for drinke,
See meate do not stinke.
Set some about cattle, some pasture to vewe,
some mault to be grinding against ye do brewe.
Some corneth, some brineth, some will not be taught,
where meate is attainted, there cookrie is naught.
[1] This and other sub-titles are not in 1577.
76.
¶ _Breakefast doings._
To breakefast that come,
Giue erie one some.
[Sidenote: Breakefast.]
Call seruants to breakefast by day starre appere,[E435]
a snatch and to worke, fellowes tarrie not here.
Let huswife be caruer, let[1] pottage be heate,
a messe to eche one, with a morsell of meate.
No more tittle tattle,
Go serue your cattle.
What tacke in a pudding, saith greedie gut wringer,
giue such ye wote what, ere a pudding he finger.
Let seruants once serued, thy cattle go serue,
least often ill seruing make cattle to sterue.
[1] see. 1577.
77.
¶ _Huswifely admonitions._
[Sidenote: Thée for thriue.]
Learne you that will thee,
This lesson of mee.[1]
No breakefast of custome prouide for to saue,
but onely for such as deserueth to haue.
No shewing of seruant what vittles in store,
shew seruant his labour, and shew him no more.
Of hauocke beware,
Cat nothing will spare.
Where all thing is common, what needeth a hutch?
where wanteth a sauer, there hauocke is mutch.
Where window is open, cat maketh a fray,
yet wilde cat with two legs is worse by my fay.
Looke well vnto thine,
Slut slouthfull must whine.
An eie in a corner who vseth to haue,
reuealeth a drab, and preuenteth a knaue.
Make maide to be clenly, or make hir crie creake,
and teach hir to stirre, when hir mistresse doth speake.
Let hollie wand threate,
Let fisgig be beate.
A wand in thy hand, though ye fight not at all,
makes youth to their businesse better to fall.
For feare of foole had I wist[2][E436] cause thee to waile,
let fisgig be taught to shut doore after taile.
Too easie the wicket,
Will still appease clicket.
With hir that will clicket make daunger to cope,
least quickly hir wicket seeme easie to ope.
As rod little mendeth where maners be spilt,
so naught will be naught say and do what thou wilt.
Fight seldome ye shall
But vse not to brall.
Much bralling with seruant, what man can abide?
pay home when thou fightest, but loue not to chide.
As order is heauenly where quiet is had,
so error is hell, or a mischiefe as bad.
What better a lawe
Than subjects in awe?
Such awe as a warning will cause to beware,
doth make the whole houshold the better to fare.
The lesse of thy counsell thy seruants doe knowe,
Their dutie the better such seruants shall showe.
Good musicke regard,
Good seruants reward.
Such seruants are oftenest painfull and good,
that sing in their labour, as birdes in the wood.
Good seruants hope iustly some friendship to feele,
and looke to haue fauour what time they do weele.
By once or twise
Tis time to be wise.
Take runagate Robin, to pitie his neede,
and looke to be filched, as sure as thy creede.
Take warning by once, that a worse do not hap,
foresight is the stopper of many a gap.
Some change for a shift,
Oft change, small thrift.
Make fewe of thy counsell to change for the best,
least one that is trudging infecteth the rest.
The stone that is rolling can gather no mosse,[E437]
for maister and seruant, oft changing is losse.
Both liberall sticketh,
Some prouender pricketh.
[Sidenote: One liberall.]
One dog for a hog, and one cat for a mouse,
one readie to giue is ynough in a house:
One gift ill accepted, keepe next in thy purse,
whom prouender pricketh are often the wurse.
[1] How daintie some be. 1573.
[2] "A wise man saith not, had I wist."--Uncertain Author in _Tottel's
Miscellany_ (p. 244, Arber's ed.).
78.
¶ _Brewing._
Brew somewhat for thine,
Else bring vp no swine.
[Sidenote: Brewing.]
Where brewing is needfull, be brewer thy selfe,
what filleth the roofe will helpe furnish the shelfe:
In buieng of drinke, by the firkin or pot,
the tallie ariseth, but hog amendes not.[1]
Well brewed, worth cost,
Ill vsed, halfe lost.
One bushell well brewed, outlasteth some twaine,
and saueth both mault, and expences in vaine.[2]
Too new is no profite, too stale is as bad,
drinke dead or else sower makes laborer sad.[E438]
Remember good Gill,
Take paine with thy swill.
[Sidenote: Séething of graines.]
Seeth grains in more water, while grains be yet hot,
and stirre them in copper, as poredge in pot.
Such heating with straw, to haue offall good store,
both pleaseth and easeth, what would ye haue more?
[1] Score quickely ariseth, hog profiteth not. 1577.
[2] Two troubles for nothing, is cost to no gaine. 1577.
79.
¶ _Baking._[E439]
Newe bread is a driuell.
Much crust is as euill.
[Sidenote: Baking.]
New bread is a waster, but mouldie is wurse,
what that way dog catcheth, that loseth the purse.
Much dowebake I praise not, much crust is as ill,
the meane is the Huswife, say nay if ye will.
80.
¶ _Cookerie._
Good cookerie craueth,
Good turnebroch saueth.
[Sidenote: Cookerie.]
Good cooke to dresse dinner, to bake and to brewe,
deserues a rewarde, being honest and trewe.
Good diligent turnebroch and trustie withall,
is sometime as needfull as some in the hall.
81.
¶ _Dairie._
Good dairie doth pleasure,
Ill dairie spendes treasure.
[Sidenote: Dairie.]
Good huswife in dairie, that needes not be tolde,
deserueth hir fee to be paid hir in golde.
Ill seruant neglecting what huswiferie saies,
deserueth hir fee to be paid hir with baies.[E440]
Good droie[E441] woorth much.[1]
Marke sluts and such.
Good droie to serue hog, to helpe wash, and to milke,
more needfull is truelie than some in their silke.
Though homelie be milker, let cleanlie be cooke,
for a slut and a slouen be knowne by their looke.
In dairie no cat,
Laie bane for a rat.
[Sidenote: Traps for rats.]
Though cat (a good mouser) doth dwell in a house,
yet euer in dairie haue trap for a mouse.
Take heede how thou laiest the bane for the rats,
for poisoning seruant, thy selfe and thy brats.
[1] Though droy be, etc. 1577.
82.
¶ _Scouring._
No scouring for pride,
Spare kettle whole side.
[Sidenote: Scouring.]
Though scouring be needfull, yet scouring too mutch,
is pride without profit, and robbeth[1] thine hutch.
Keepe kettles from knocks, set tubs out of Sun,
for mending is costlie, and crackt is soone dun.
[1] rubbeth. 1573, 1577.
83.
_Washing._
Take heede when ye wash,
Else run in the lash.
[Sidenote: Washing.]
Maids, wash well and wring well, but beat ye wot how,
if any lack beating, I feare it be yow.
In washing by hand, haue an eie to thy boll,
for launders and millers, be quick of their toll.
Drie sunne, drie winde,
Safe binde, safe finde.
Go wash well, saith Sommer, with sunne I shall drie,
go wring well, saith Winter, with winde so shall I.
To trust without heede is to venter a ioint,
giue tale and take count, is a huswifelie point.
Where many be packing,
Are manie things lacking.
Where hens fall a cackling, take heede to their nest,
where drabs fall a whispring, take heede to the rest.
Through negligent huswifes, are many things lacking,
and Gillet suspected will quickly be packing.
84.
_Malting._
Ill malting is theft,
Wood dride hath a weft.
[Sidenote: Malting.]
House may be so handsome, and skilfulnes such,
to make thy owne malt, it shall profit thee much.
Som drieth with strawe, and some drieth with wood,
wood asketh more charge, and nothing so good.[E442]
Take heede to the kell,
Sing out as a bell.
Be suer no chances to fier can drawe,
the wood, or the furzen, the brake or the strawe.
Let Gillet be singing, it doth verie well,
to keepe hir from sleeping and burning the kell.
Best dride best speedes,
Ill kept, bowd breedes.
Malt being well speered, the more it will cast,
malt being well dried, the longer will last.
Long kept in ill soller, (vndoubted thou shalt,)
through bowds without number loose quickly thy malt.[E443]
85.
¶ _Dinner matters._
For hunger or thirst,
Serue cattle well first.
[Sidenote: Dinner time.]
By noone[E444] see your dinner, be readie and neate,
let meate tarrie seruant, not seruant his meate.
Plough cattle a baiting, call seruant to dinner,
the thicker togither, the charges the thinner.
Togither is best,
For hostis and gest.
3[1]
Due season is best, altogither is gay,
dispatch hath no fellow, make short and away.
Beware of Gill laggoose, disordring thy house,
mo dainties who catcheth, than craftie fed mouse!
Let such haue ynough,
That follow the plough.
Giue seruant no dainties, but giue him ynough,
too many chaps walking,[E445] do begger the plough.
Poore seggons halfe starued worke faintly and dull,
and lubbers doo loiter, their bellies too full.
Giue neuer too much,
To lazie and such.
Feede lazie that thresheth a flap and a tap,
like slothfull, that all day be stopping a gap.
Some litherly lubber more eateth than twoo,
yet leaueth vndone that another will doo.
Where nothing will last,
Spare such as thou hast.
Some cutteth thy linnen, some spoileth[2] their broth,
bare table to some doth as well as a cloth.
Treene dishes be homely, and yet not to lack,
where stone is no laster take tankard and iack.
Knap boy on the thums,
And saue him his crums.
That pewter is neuer for manerly feastes,
that daily doth serue so vnmanerly beastes.
Some gnaweth and leaueth, some crusts and some crums,
eat such their own leuings, or gnaw their own thums.
Serue God euer furst,
Take nothing at wurst.
[Sidenote: Grace before and after meate.]
At Dinner, at Supper, at morning, at night,
giue thankes vnto God, for his gifts so in[3] sight.
Good husband and huswife, will sometime alone,
make shift with a morsell and picke of a bone.
Inough thou art tolde,
Too much will not holde.
Three dishes well dressed, and welcome withall,
both pleaseth thy friend and becommeth thine hall.
Enough is a plentie,[E446] too much is a pride,
the plough with ill holding, goes quicklie aside.
[1] Stanzas 3-12 are not in 1577.
[2] spilleth. 1577.
[3] in thy. 1577.
86.
¶ _Afternoone workes._
Make companie breake,
Go cherish the weake.
[Sidenote: Afternoone workes.]
When Dinner is ended, set seruants to wurke,
and follow such fellowes[1] as loueth to lurke.
To seruant in sicknesse see nothing ye grutch,
a thing of a trifle shall comfort him mutch.
Who manie do feede,
Saue much they had neede.
Put chippings[E447] in dippings, vse parings to saue,
fat capons or chickens that lookest to haue.
Saue droppings and skimmings, how euer ye doo,
for medcine for cattell, for cart and for shoo.
Leane capon vnmeete,
Deere fed is vnsweete.
Such ofcorne as commeth giue wife to hir fee,
feede willingly such as do helpe to feede thee.
Though fat fed is daintie, yet this I thee warne,
be cunning in fatting for robbing thy barne.
Peece hole to defende.
Things timely amende.
Good semsters be sowing of fine pretie knackes,
good huswifes be mending and peecing their sackes.
Though making and mending be huswifely waies,
yet mending in time is the huswife to praies.
Buie newe as is meete,
Marke blanket and sheete.
Though Ladies may rend and buie new ery day,
good huswifes must mend and buie new as they may.
Call quarterly seruants to court and to leete,[E448]
write euerie Couerlet, Blanket, and Sheete.
Shift slouenly elfe,
Be gayler thy selfe.
Though shifting too oft be a theefe in a house,
yet shift slut and slouen for feare of a louse.
Graunt doubtfull no key of his chamber in purse,
least chamber doore lockt be to theeuerie a nurse.
Saue feathers for gest,
These other rob chest.
[Sidenote: Saue feathers.]
Saue wing for a thresher, when Gander doth die,
saue feather of all thing, the softer to lie.
Much spice is a theefe, so is candle and fier,
sweete sauce is as craftie as euer was frier.
Wife make thine owne candle,
Spare pennie to handle.
[Sidenote: Candle making.]
Prouide for thy tallow, ere frost commeth in,
and make thine owne candle, ere winter begin.
If pennie for all thing be suffred to trudge,
trust long, not to pennie, to haue him thy drudge.
[1] marchants. 1577.
87.
¶ _Euening workes._
Time drawing to night,
See all things go right.
[Sidenote: Euening workes.]
When hennes go to roost go in hand to dresse meate,
serue hogs and to milking and some to serue neate.
Where twaine be ynow, be not serued with three,
more knaues in a companie worser they bee.
Make lackey to trudge,
Make seruant thy drudge.
For euerie trifle leaue ianting thy nag,
but rather make lackey of Jack boie thy wag.
Make seruant at night lug in wood or a log,
let none come in emptie but slut and thy dog.
False knaue readie prest,
All safe is the best.
Where pullen vse nightly to pearch in the yard,
there two legged foxes keepe watches and ward.
See cattle well serued, without and within,
and all thing at quiet ere supper begin.
Take heede it is needeful,
True pittie is meedeful.
No clothes in garden, no trinkets without,
no doore leaue vnbolted, for feare of a dout.
Thou woman whom pitie becommeth the best,
graunt all that hath laboured time to take rest.
88.
¶ _Supper matters._
Vse mirth and good woorde,
At bed and at boorde.
[Sidenote: Supper time huswiferie.]
Provide for thy husband, to make him good cheere,
make merrie togither, while time ye be heere.
At bed and at boord, howsoeuer befall,
what euer God sendeth be merrie withall.
No brawling make,
No ielousie take.
No taunts before seruants, for hindring of fame,
no iarring too loude for auoyding of shame.
As fransie and heresie roueth togither,
so iealousie leadeth a foole ye wot whither.
Tend such as ye haue,
Stop talkatiue knaue.
Yong children and chickens would euer be eating,
good seruants looke dulie for gentle intreating.
No seruant at table vse sausly to talke,
least tongue set at large out of measure do walke.
No snatching at all,
Sirs, hearken now all.
No lurching,[E449] no snatching, no striuing at all,
least one go without and another haue all.
Declare after Supper, take heede therevnto,
what worke in the morning ech seruant shall do.
89.
¶ _After supper matters._
Thy soule hath a clog,
Forget not thy dog.
[Sidenote: Workes after supper.]
Remember those children whose parents be poore,
which hunger, yet dare not craue[1] at thy doore.
Thy Bandog[E450] that serueth for diuerse mishaps,
forget not to giue him thy bones and thy scraps.
Make keies to be keepers,
To bed ye sleepers.
Where mouthes be many, to spend that thou hast,
set keies to be keepers, for spending too fast.
To bed after supper let drousie go sleepe,
least knaue in the darke to his marrow do creepe.
Keepe keies as thy life,
Feare candle good wife.
Such keies lay vp safe, ere ye take ye to rest,
of dairie, of buttrie, of cubboord and chest.
Feare candle in hailoft, in barne, and in shed,
feare flea smocke and mendbreech, for burning their bed.
See doore lockt fast,
Two keies make wast.
A doore without locke is a baite for a knaue,
a locke without key is a foole that will haue.
One key to two locks, if it breake is a greefe,
two keies to one locke in the ende is a theefe.
Night workes troubles hed,
Locke doores and to bed.
The day willeth done whatsoeuer ye bid,
the night is a theefe, if ye take not good hid.
Wash dishes, lay leauens, saue fire and away,
locke doores and to bed, a good huswife will say.
To bed know thy guise,
To rise do likewise.
[Sidenote: Bed time.]
In winter at nine, and in sommer at ten,
to bed after supper both maidens and men.
[Sidenote: Time to rise.]
In winter at fiue a clocke, seruant arise,
in sommer at foure is verie good guise.[E451]
Loue so as ye may
Loue many a day.
Be lowly not sollen, if ought go amisse,
what wresting may loose thee, that winne with a kisse.
Both beare and forebeare now and then as ye may,
then, wench God a mercie, thy husband will say.
[1] to. 1577.
90.
¶ _The ploughmans feasting daies._
This would not be slept,
Old guise must be kept.
Good huswiues, whom God hath enriched ynough,
forget not the feastes that belong to the plough.
The meaning is onelie to ioie and be glad,
for comfort with labour is fit to be had.
[Sidenote: Leicestershire.]
Plough Monday.[E452]
Plough Monday, next after that Twelftide is past,
bids out with the plough, the woorst husband is last.
If ploughman get hatchet or whip to the skreene,
maides loseth their cock if no water be seene.[E453]
Shroftide.[E454]
At Shroftide to shrouing, go thresh the fat hen,
if blindfild can kill hir, then giue it thy men.
Maides, fritters and pancakes ynow see ye make:
let slut haue one pancake, for companie sake.
[Sidenote: Northamptonshire.]
Sheepe shearing.
Wife make vs a dinner, spare flesh neither corne,
make wafers and cakes, for our sheepe must be shorne.
At sheepe shearing neighbours none other thing craue,
but good cheere and welcome like neighbours to haue.
The wake day.[E455]
Fill ouen full of flawnes,[E456] Ginnie passe not for sleepe,
to morow thy father his wake day will keepe.
Then euerie wanton may daunce at hir will,
both Tomkin with Tomlin, and Jankin with Gill.
Haruest home.
For all this good feasting, yet art thou not loose,
till ploughman thou giuest his haruest home goose.[E457]
Though goose go in stubble, I passe not for that,
let goose haue a goose, be she leane, be she fat.
Seede cake.
Wife, some time this weeke, if the wether hold cleere,
an end of wheat sowing we make for this yeere.
Remember you therefore though I doo it not:
the seede Cake, the Pasties, and Furmentie pot.[E458]
Twise a week roast.
Good ploughmen looke weekly, of custome and right,
for roast meat on Sundaies and Thursdaies at night.
This dooing and keeping such custome and guise,
they call thee good huswife, they loue thee likewise.
91.
¶ _The good huswifelie Physicke._
[1]
Good huswiues prouides, ere an sicknes doo come,
of sundrie good things in hir house to haue some.
Good Aqua composita,[E459] Vineger tart,
Rose water and treakle, to comfort the hart.
[2]
Cold herbes in hir garden for agues that burne,
that ouer strong heat to good temper may turne.
While Endiue and Suckerie, with Spinnage ynough,
all such with good pot herbes should follow the plough.
[3]
Get water of Fumentorie, Liuer to coole,
and others the like, or els lie like a foole.
Conserue of the Barberie, Quinces and such,
with Sirops that easeth the sickly so much.
[Sidenote: Physition.]
[4]
Aske _Medicus_ counsell, ere medcine ye make,
and honour that man, for necessities sake.
Though thousands hate physick, because of the cost,
yet thousands it helpeth, that else should be lost.
[Sidenote: Good diet.]
[5]
Good broth and good kéeping do much now and than,
good diet with wisedome best comforteth man.
In health to be stirring shall profit thée best,
in sicknes hate trouble, séeke quiet and rest.
[Sidenote: Thinke on thy soule and haue a good hope.]
[6]
Remember thy soule, let no fansie preuaile,
make readie to Godward, let faith neuer quaile.
The sooner thy selfe thou submittest to God,
the sooner he ceaseth to scourge with his rod.
92.
¶ _The good motherlie nurserie._
[1]
Good huswiues take paine, and doo count it good luck,
to make their owne brest their owne childe to giue suck.
Though wrauling and rocking be noisome so neare,
yet lost by ill nursing is woorser to heare.
[2]
But one thing I warne thee, let huswife be nurse,
least husband doo find thée too franke with his purse.
What hilback and filbellie maketh away,
that helpe to make good, or else looke for a fraie.
[3]
Giue childe that is fitly, giue babie the big,
giue hardnes to youth and to roperipe a twig.
Wee find it not spoken so often for naught,
that children were better vnborne than vntaught,
[4]
Some cockneies[E460] with cocking are made verie fooles,
fit neither for prentise, for plough, nor for schooles.
Teach childe to aske blessing, serue God, and to church,
then blesse as a mother, else blesse him with burch.
Thou huswife thus dooing, what further shall néede?
but all men to call thée good mother in déede.
93.
¶ _Thinke on the poore._
Remember the poore, that for Gods sake doo call,
Take this in good part, whatsoeuer thou bee:
and wish me no woorse than I wish vnto thee.
94.
¶ _A comparison betweene good huswiferie and euill._[E461]
Comparing togither, good huswife with bad,
The knowledge of either, the better is had.
Ill huswiferie lieth
till nine of the clock.
Good huswiferie trieth
to rise with the cock.
Ill huswiferie tooteth,
to make hir selfe braue.[E462]
Good huswiferie looketh
what houshold must haue.
Ill huswiferie trusteth
to him and to hir.
Good huswiferie lusteth
hir selfe for to stir.
Ill huswiferie careth
for this nor for that.
Good huswiferie spareth
for feare ye wot what.
Ill huswiferie pricketh
hir selfe vp in pride.
Good huswiferie tricketh
hir house as a bride.
Ill huswiferie othing
or other must craue.
Good huswiferie nothing,
but needfull will haue.
Ill huswiferie mooueth
with gossep to spend.
Good huswiferie loueth
hir houshold to tend.
Ill huswiferie wanteth
with spending too fast.
Good huswiferie canteth[1][E463]
the lenger to last.
Ill huswiferie easeth
hir selfe with vnknowne.
Good huswiferie pleaseth
hir selfe with hir owne.
Ill huswiferie brooketh
mad toies in hir hed.
Good huswiferie looketh
that all things be fed.
Ill huswiferie bringeth
a shilling to naught.
Good huswiferie singeth,
hir cofers full fraught.
Ill huswiferie rendeth,
and casteth aside.
Good huswiferie mendeth,
else would it go wide.
Ill huswiferie sweepeth
her linnen to gage.
Good huswiferie keepeth,
to serue hir in age.
Ill huswiferie craueth
in secret to borow.
Good huswiferie saueth
to day for to morow.
Ill huswiferie pineth,
not hauing to eate.
Good huswiferie dineth,
with plentie of meate.
Ill huswiferie letteth
the Diuell take all.
Good huswiferie setteth
good brag of a small.
Good huswife good fame hath of best in the towne,
Ill huswife ill name hath of euerie clowne.
[1] scanteth. 1577.
_Thus endeth the booke of Huswiferie._
95.
_For men a perfect warning
How childe shall come by larning._
All you that faine would learne the perfect waie,
To haue your childe in Musick something séene,
Aske nature first what thereto she doth saie,
Ere further suite ye make to such a Quéene.
For doubtlesse _Grossum caput_ is not he
Of whom the learned Muses séene will be.[E464]
Once tride that nature trim hath done hir part,
And Ladie Musick farre[1] in loue withall,
Be wise who first doth teach thy childe that Art,
Least homelie breaker mar fine ambling ball.[E465]
Not rod in mad braines hand is that can helpe,
But gentle skill doth make the proper whelpe.
Where choise is hard, count good for well a fine,[E466]
Skill mixt with will, is he that teacheth best:
Let this suffice for teaching childe of thine,
Choose quickly well for all the lingring rest.
Mistaught at first how seldome prooueth well!
Trim taught, O God, how shortly doth excell!
Although as ships must tarrie winde and tide,
And perfect howers abide their stinted time;
So likewise, though of learning dailie tride,
Space must be had ere wit may thereto clime.
Yet easie steps, and perfect way to trust,
Doth cause good spéede, confesse of force we must.
Thus in the childe though wit ynough we finde,
And teacher good néere hand or other where,
And time as apt as may be thought with minde,
Nor cause in such thing much to doubt or feare.
Yet cocking Mams,[E467] and shifting Dads[E468] from schooles,
Make pregnant wits to prooue vnlearned fooles.
Ere learning come, to haue first art thou taught,
Apt learning childe, apt time that thing to frame,
Apt cunning man to teach, else all is naught,
Apt parents, glad to bring to passe the same.
On such apt ground the Muses loue to bilde,
This lesson learne; adue else learned child.
[1] ? faire [1614].
[In the edition of 1573, The Sonnet to Lady Paget, which follows the
Posies, is placed here.]
96.
¶ The description of a womans age by vi. times xiiij yeeres
prentiship, with a lesson to the same.
14. Two first seuen yeeres, for a rod they doe whine,
28. Two next, as a perle in the world they doe shine,
42. Two next, trim beautie beginneth to swerue,
56. Two next, for matrones or drudges they serue,
70. Two next, doth craue a staffe for a stay,
84. Two next, a beere to fetch them away.
A Lesson ( Then purchase some pelfe,
( by fiftie and thrée:
( or buckle thy selfe,
( a drudge for to bée.
97.
¶ _The Inholders posie._[1]
[1]
At meales my friend who vitleth here, and sitteth with his host,
Shall both be sure of better chere, and scape with lesser cost.[E469]
[2]
But he that will attendance haue, a chamber by himselfe,
Must more regard what pains do craue than passe of worldly pelfe.
[3]
Let no man looke to purchase linne[E470] with pinching by the waie,
But laie before he takes his Inne to make his purse to paie.
[4]
For nothing paie and nothing praie, in Inne it is the gise,
Where no point gain, there no point pain, think this if you be wise.
[5]
For toiling much and spoiling more, great charge smal gains or none,
Soone sets thine host at needams shore,[2][E471] to craue the beggers bone.
[6]
Foreséeing this, come day or night, take vp what place ye please.
Vse mine as thine, let fortune spight, and boldly take thine ease.
[1] Not in edition of 1573.
[2] A pun recorded by Ray. Needham is in Suffolk (M.).
98.
¶ _Certaine Table Lessons._
Friend, eat lesse, and drinke lesse,[1] and buie thee a knife,
else looke for a caruer not alway too rife.
Some kniueles their daggers for brauerie weare,
that often for surfetting neede not to feare.[E472]
At dinner and supper the table doth craue
good fellowly neighbour good manner to haue.
Aduise thee well therefore, ere tongue be too free,
or slapsauce be noted too saucie to bee.
If anything wanteth or seemeth amis,
to call for or shew it, good maner it is.
But busie fault finder, and saucie withall,
is roister like ruffen, no manner at all.
Some cutteth the napkin, some trencher will nick,
some sheweth like follie, in many a trick.
Let such apish[2] bodie so toieng at meate,
go toie with his nodie, like ape in the streate.[E473]
Some commeth vnsent for, not for thy good cheere,
but sent[3] as a spiall, to listen and heere.
Which being once knowne, for a knaue let him go,
for knaue will be knauish, his nature is so.
[1] eateles and drinkles. 1577.
[2] Let apishle. 1577.
[3] bent. 1577.
99.
¶ _Lessons for waiting servants._
One diligent seruiture, skilfull to waight,
more comelieth thy table than other some eight,
That stand for to listen, or gasing about,
not minding their dutie, within nor without.
Such waiter is fautie that standeth so by,
vnmindful of seruice, forgetting his ey.
If maister to such giue a bone for to gnaw,
he doth but his office, to teach such a daw.
Such seruiture also deserueth a check,
that runneth out fisging[E474] with meat in his beck.
Such rauening puttocks for vittles so trim,
would haue a good maister to puttock with him.
Who daily can suffer, or else can afoord,
his meat so vp snatched that comes from his boord?
So tossed[1] with cormorants, here and there some,
and others to want it that orderlie come?
Good seruiture waieth (once dinner begon,)
what asketh attendance and what to be don.
So purchasing maister a praise with the best,
gets praise to himselfe, both of maister and gest.
[1] toesed. 1577.
100.
¶ _Husbandly posies for the hall._
Friend, here I dwell, and here I haue a little worldly pelfe,
Which on my friend I kéepe to spend, as well as on my selfe.
What euer fare you hap to finde, take welcome for the best,
That hauing then disdaine thou not, for wanting of the rest.
Backbiting[E475] talk that flattering blabs know wily how to blenge,
The wise doth note, the friend[E476] doth hate, the enmie will reuenge.
The wise will spend or giue or lend, yet kéepe to haue in store,
If fooles may haue from hand to mouth, they passe vpon no more.
Where ease is sought, at length we sée, there plentie waxeth scant,
Who careles liues go borow must, or else full often want.
The world doth think the welthy man is he that least shall néed,
But true it is the godlie[1] man is he that best shall spéed.
[1] Cf. _ante_, ch. 72, st. 2.
101.
¶ _Posies for the parler._
As hatred is the serpents noisome rod,
So friendship is the louing gift of God.
The dronken friend is friendship very euill,
The frantike friend is friendship for the Deuill.
The quiet friend all one in word and déede
Great comfort is, like ready gold at néede.
With bralling fooles that wrall for euerie wrong,
Firme friendship neuer can continue long.
In time that man shall seldome friendship mis,
That waith what thing touch kept in friendship is.
Oft times a friend is got with easie cost,
Which vsed euill is oft as quickly lost.
Hast thou a friend, as hart may wish at will?
Then vse him so to haue his friendship still.
Wouldst haue a friend, wouldst knowe what friend is best?
Haue God thy friend, who passeth all the rest.
102.
¶ _Posies for the gests chamber._
The slouen and the careles man, the roinish[E477] nothing nice,
To lodge in chamber comely deckt, are seldome suffred twice.
With curteine som make scaberd clene, with couerlet their shoo,
All dirt and mire some wallow bed, as spanniels vse to doo.
Though bootes and spurs be nere so foule, what passeth some thereon?
What place they foule, what thing they teare, by tumbling thervpon.
Foule male some cast on faire boord, be carpet nere so cléene,
what maners careles maister hath, by knaue his man is séene.
Some make the chimnie chamber pot to smell like filthie sink,
Yet who so bold, so soone to say, fough, how these houses stink?
They therefore such as make no force what comly thing they spil,
Must haue a cabben like themselues, although against their wil.
But gentlemen will gently doe where gentlenes is sheawd,
Obseruing this, with loue abide, or else hence all beshreawd.
103.
¶ _Posies for thine owne bed chamber._
What wisdom more, what better life, than pleseth God to send?
what worldly goods, what longer vse, than pleseth God to lend?
What better fare than well content, agréeing with thy wealth?[1]
what better gest, than trustie friend, in sicknes and in health?
What better bed than conscience good,[2] to passe the night with sléepe?
what better worke than daily care fro sinne thy selfe to kéepe?
What better thought, than think on God and daily him to serue?
What better gift than to the poore that ready be to sterue?
What greater praise of God and man, than mercie for to shew?[3]
who merciles shall mercie finde, that mercie shewes to few?
What worse despaire, than loth to die for feare to go to hell?
what greater faith than trust in God, through Christ in heauen to dwell?
[1] what mirth to godly welth. 1577.
[2] quiet rest. 1577.
[3]
----than hatred to forsake
What merciles shall mercy get, that mercy none will take. 1577.
[1573 M.].
104.
¶ _A Sonet to the Ladie Paget._
[1]
Some pleasures take,
and cannot giue,
but onely make
poore thanks their shift:
Some meaning well,
in debt doo liue,
and cannot tell
how else to shift.
[2]
Some knock and faine
would ope the doore,
to learne the vaine
good turne to praise:
Some shew good face,
and be but poore,
yet haue a grace,
good fame to raise.
[3]
Some owe and giue,
yet still in det,
and so must liue,
for aught I knowe:
Some wish to pay,
and cannot get,
but night and day
still more must owe.
[4]
Euen so must I, for seruice past,
Still wish you good while life doth last.
105.
¶ _Principall points of Religion._
To praie to God continually,
To learne to know him rightfully.
To honour God in Trinitie,
The Trinitie in vnitie.
The Father in his maiestie,
The Sonne in his humanitie,
The holie Ghosts benignitie,
Three persons, one in Deitie.
To serue him alway holily,
To aske him all thing needfully,
To praise him in all companie,[1]
To loue him alway hartilie,[2]
To dread him alway christianlie,[3]
To aske him mercie penitently,[4]
To trust him alway faithfully,
To obey him alway willingly,
To abide him alway patiently,
To thanke him alway thankfully,
To liue here alway vertuously,
To vse thy neighbour honestly,
To looke for death still presently,[E478]
To helpe the poore in miserie,
To hope for heauens felicitie,
To haue faith hope and charitie,
To count this life but vanitie:
be points of Christianitie.
[1] alway worthely. 1577.
[2] steadfastlie. 1573 (M.), 1577.
[3] fearfullie. 1573 (M.), 1577.
[4] heartilie. 1573 (M.), 1577.
106.
¶ _The Authors beleefe._
[Sidenote: God the Father.]
This is my stedfast Créede, my faith, and all my trust,
That in the heauens there is a God, most mightie, milde and iust.
A God aboue all gods, a King aboue all kings,
The Lord of lords, chiefe gouernour of heauen and earthly things.
[Sidenote: Maker of Heauen.]
That power hath of life, of death, of heauen and hell,
That all thing made as pleaseth him, so woonderfull to tell:
That made the hanging Skies, so deckt with diuers lights,
Of darknes made the chéerfull daies, and all our restfull nights.
[Sidenote: The earth.]
That clad this earth with herbe, with trées, and sundrie fruites,
With beast, with bird, both wild and tame, of strange and sundrie suites:
That intermixt the same with mines like veines of Ore,
Of siluer, golde, of precious stones, and treasures many more.
[Sidenote: The waters, frost and snowe.]
That ioyned brookes to dales, to hilles fresh water springs,
With riuers swéete along the méedes, to profit many things:
That made the hoarie frosts, the flakie snowes so trim,
The honie deawes, the blustering windes, to serue as pleaseth him.
[Sidenote: The seas.]
That made the surging seas, in course to ebbe and flo,
That skilfull man with sailing ship, mought trauell to and fro:
And stored so the same, for mans vnthankfull sake,
That euery nation vnder heauen mought thereby profit take.
[Sidenote: The soul of man.]
That gaue to man a soule, with reason how to liue,
That doth to him and all things else, his blessing dailie giue:
That is not séene, yet séeth how man doth runne his race,
Whose dailie workes both good and bad, stand knowne before his face.
[Sidenote: Thunder and plagues.]
That sendeth thundring claps, like terrours out of hell,
That man may know a God there is, that in the heauens doth dwel:
That sendeth threatning plagues, to kéepe our liues in awe,
His benefites if we forget, or do contemne his lawe.
[Sidenote: Full of mercie.]
That dailie hateth sinne, and loueth vertue well,
And is the God of Abraham, Isac, and Israell,
That doth displeasure take, when we his lawes offend,
And yet amids his heauie wrath, his mercie doth extend.
[Sidenote: Christ the Sonne.]
This is that Lord of hostes, the father of vs all,
The maker of what ere was made, my God on whom I call:
Which for the loue of man, sent downe his onelie sonne,
Begot of him before the worldes were any whit begonne.
[Sidenote: Christes birth. Christ, God and man.]
This entred Maries wombe, as faith affirmeth sure,
Conceiued by the holy Ghost, borne of that virgine pure;
This was both God and man, of Jewes the hoped king,
And liued here, saue onely sinne, like man in euerie thing.
[Sidenote: Christ, our Messias.]
This is that virgins childe, that same most holie Preist,
The lamb of God, the prophet great, whom scripture calleth Christ,
This that Messias was, of whom the Prophet spake,
That should tread down the serpents head and our attonement make.
[Sidenote: Christes passion.]
This Judas did betray, to false dissembling Jewes,
Which vnto Pilat being Judge, did falsely him accuse:
Who (through that wicked Judge) and of those Jewes despight,
Condemned and tormented was, with all the force they might.
To liuing wight more euill, what could such wretches do?
More pearcing wounds, more bitter pains, than they did put him to?
They crowned him with thorne, that was the king of kings,
That sought to saue the soule of man, aboue all worldly things.
[Sidenote: Christes death.]
This was that Pascall lambe whose loue for vs so stood,
That on the mount of Caluerie,[1] for vs did shed his blood:
Where hanging on the Crosse, no shame he did forsake,
Till death giuen him by pearcing speare, an ende of life did make.
[Sidenote: Christes buriall.]
[Sidenote: Christes descension.]
This Ioseph séeing dead, the bodie thence did craue,
And tooke it forthwith from the crosse, and laid it in his graue,
Downe thence he went to hell, in vsing there his will,[E479]
His power[2] I meane, his slained corps in tumb remaining still.
[Sidenote: Christes resurrection.]
[Sidenote: Christes ascension.]
From death to life againe, the third day this did rise,
And séene[E480] on earth to his elect, times oft in sundrie wise:
And after into heauen, ascend he did in sight,
And sitteth on the right hand there, of God the father of might.
[Sidenote: Christ shall be our iudge.]
Where for vs wretches all, his father he doth pray,
To haue respect vnto his death, and put our sinnes away:
From thence with sounded trump, which noise all flesh shall dread,
He shall returne with glorie againe, to iudge the quicke and dead.
[Sidenote: The Iudges sentence.]
Then shall that voice be heard, Come, come, ye good to mée,
Hence, hence to hell you workers euill, where paine shall euer bée:
This is that louing Christ, whom I my Sauiour call,
And onely put my trust in him, and in none else at all.
[Sidenote: God the holy Ghost.]
In God the holy Ghost, I firmely do belieue,
Which from the father and the sonne a blessed[3] life giue,
Which by the Prophets spake, which doth all comfort send,
Which I do trust shall be my guide, when this my life shall ende.
[Sidenote: The Catholike Church.]
A holy catholike Church, on earth I graunt there is,
And those which frame their liues by that, shall neuer do[4] amis:
The head whereof is Christ, his word the chiefest post:
Preseruer of this temple great, is God the holy Ghost.
[Sidenote: The Communion of Saints.]
I do not doubt there is a multitude of Saints,
More good is don resembling them, than shewing them our plaints:
Their faith and workes in Christ, that glorie them did giue,
Which glorie we shall likewise haue, if likewise we do liue.
[Sidenote: Forgiueness of sinnes.]
At God of heauen there is, forgiuenesse of our sinnes,
Through Christes death, through faith in it, and through none other ginnes:
If we repentant here, his mercie dailie craue,
Through stedfast hope and faith in Christ, forgiuenes we shall haue.
[Sidenote: Mans resurrection.]
I hope and trust vpon the rising of the flesh,
This corps of mine that first must die, shall rise againe afresh:
The soule and bodie euen then, in one shall ioyned bée,
As Christ did rise from death to life, euen so through Christ shall wée.
[Sidenote: Life euerlasting.]
As Christ is glorified, and neuer more shall die,
As Christ ascended into heauen, through Christ euen so shall I:
As Christ I count my head, and I a member of his,
So God I trust for Christes sake, shall settle me in blis.
[25]
Thus here we learne of God, that there be persons thrée,
The Father, Sonne, the holy Ghost, one God in trinitée,
In substance all like one, one God, one Lord, one might,
Whose persons yet we do diuide, and so we may by right.
[26]
As God the Father is the maker of vs all,
So God the Sonne redéemer is, to whom for helpe we call,
And God the holy Ghost, the soule of man doth winne,
By moouing hir to waile for grace, ashamed of hir sinne.
[27]
This is that God of gods, whom euerie soule should loue,
Whom all mens hearts should quake for feare his wrath on them to moue:
That this same mightie God, aboue all others chiefe,
Shall saue my soule from dolefull Hell, is all my whole beliefe.
[1] Caluerine. 1577.
[2] soule. 1577.
[3] proceeding. 1577.
[4] speede. 1577.
107.
_Of the omnipotencie of God, and debilitie of man._
O God thou glorious God, what god is like to thée?
What life, what strength is like to thine, as al the world may see?
The heauens, the earth, the seas, and all thy workes therein,
Do shew (to who thou wouldst to know)[E481] what thou hast euer bin.
But all the thoughts of man, are bent to wretched euill,
Man doth commit idolatrie bewitched of the Deuill.
What euill is left vndone, where man may haue his will,
Man euer was an hypocrite, and so continues still.
[Sidenote: What these 4 principal diuels do signifie.]
What daily watch is made, the soule of man to slea,
By Lucifer, by Belzabub, Mammon, and Asmodea?
In diuelish pride, in wrath, in coueting too much,
In fleshly lust the time is spent, the life of man is such.
The ioy that man hath here, is as a sparke of fier,
His acts be like the smoldring smoke, himselfe like dirt and mier.
His strength euen as a réede, his age much like a flower,
His breth or life is but a puffe, vncertaine euerie hower.[E482]
But for the holy Ghost, and for his giftes of grace,
The death of Christ, thy mercie great, man were in wofull case.
O graunt us therefore Lord, to amend that is amisse,
And when from hence we do depart, to rest with thee in blisse.
108.
_Of Almes deedes._
_Eleemosyna prodest homini in vita, in morte, & post mortem.
Out of S. Augustine._
[1]
For onely loue to God, more Christian like to liue,
And for a zeale to helpe the poore, thine almes daily giue.
Let gift no glorie looke,[E483] nor euill possesse thy minde:
And for a truth these profites thrée, through almes shalt thou finde.
[2]
1 First here the holy Ghost shall daily through his grace,
Prouoke[E484] thée to repentant life, Gods mercie to embrace.
2 Of goods and friends (by death) when thou thy leaue must take,
Thine almes déedes shall claspe thy soule, and neuer it forsake.
[3]
3 When God shall after death, call soone for thine account,
thine alms then through faith in Christ, shal al things els surmount.
But yet for any déede, put thou no trust therein,
but put thy trust in God (through Christ) to pardon thée thy sin.
[4]
For else as cackling hen with noise bewraies hir nest,
Euen so go thou and blaze thy déeds, and lose thou all the rest.
109.
_Of_ malus homo.
Malus homo, _out of S. Augustine._
Of naughtie man, I read, two sundrie things are ment,
The ton is man, the other naught, which ought him to repent.
The man we ought to loue, bicause of much therein,
The euill in him we ought to hate, euen as a filthie sin.
So doth thy daily sinnes the heauenly Lord offend,
But when thou dost repent the same, his wrath is at an end.
110.
_Of two sorts of people._
_Of two sorts of men, the tone good, and tother bad, out of S.
Augustine._
Since first the world began, there was and shall be still,
Of humane kind two sundrie sorts, thon good and thother ill:
Which till the iudgement day, shall here togither dwell,
But then the good shall vp to heauen, the bad shall downe to hell.
111.
_Of what force the devil is if he be resisted._
_Diabolo cùm resistitur, est vt formica: Cùm
verò eius suggestio recipitur, fortis est vt leo._
Out of S. Augustine.
When Sathan we resist, a Pismier shall he be,
But when we séeme to giue him place, a Lion then is he.
112.
¶ _Eight of S. Barnards verses, both in Latine and English with one
note to them both._[1][E485]
_Cur mundus militat, sub vana gloria,
Cuius prosperitas, est transitoria?
Tam citò labitur, eius potentia,
Quàm vasa figuli, quæ sunt fragilia?_
Why[2] so triumphes the world, in pompe and glorie vaine,
Whose state so happie thought, so fickle[3] doth remaine?
Whose brauerie slipprie stands, and doth so soone decaie,
As doth the potters pan, compact of brittle claie?
_Plus crede literis, scriptis in glacie,
Quàm mundi fragilis, vanæ fallaciæ,
Fallax in præmijs, virtutis specie,
Quæ nunquam habuit tempus fiduciæ._
More credite sée thou giue, to letters wrote in ise,
Than vnto vaine deceits, of brittle worlds deuise.
In gifts to vertue due, beguiling many one,
Yet those same neuer haue long time to hope vpon.
_Magis credendum est, viris fallacibus,
Quàm mundi miseris prosperitatibus,
Falsis insanijs et voluptatibus,
Falsis quoque studijs et vanitatibus._
To false dissembling men more trust is to be had,
Than to the prosperous state of wretched world so bad:
What with voluptuousnes, and other maddish toies,
False studies won with paine, false vanities and ioies.
_Dic vbi Salomon, olim tam nobilis?
Vel vbi Samson est, dux invincibilis?
Vel dulcis Ionathas, multùm amabilis?
Vel pulcher Absolon, vultu mirabilis?_
Tell where is _Salomon_, that once so noble was?
Or where now _Samson_ is, in strength whome none could pas?
Or woorthie _Ionathas_, that prince so louely bold?
Or faier _Absolon_, so goodlie to behold?
_Quò Cæsar abijt, celsus imperio?
Vel Diues splendidus, totus in prandio?
Dic vbi Tullius, clarus eloquio?
Vel Aristoteles, summus ingenio?_
Shew whither is _Cesar_ gone, which conquered far and néere?
Or that rich famous _Carle_,[E486] so giuen to bellie chéere:
Shew where is _Tullie_ now, for eloquence so fit?
Or _Aristoteles_, of such a pregnant wit?
_O esca vermium! ô massa pulueris!
O ros! ô vanitas! cùr sic extolleris,
Ignoras penitùs vtrùm cras vixeris,
Fac bonum omnibus, quàm diu poteris._
O thou fit bait for wormes![E487] O thou great heape of dust!
O dewe! O vanitie! why so extolst thy lust?
Thou therefore ignorant, what time thou hast to liue,
Doe good to erie man, while here thou hast to giue.
_Quàm breue festum est, hæc mundi gloria?
Vt umbra hominis, sic eius gaudia,
Quæ semper subtrahit, æterna præmia,
Et ducunt hominem, ad dura deuia._
How short a feast (to count) is this same worlds renowne?
Such as mens shadowes be, such ioies it brings to towne.
Which alway plucketh vs from Gods eternall blis:
And leadeth man to hell, a iust reward of his.
_Hæc mundi gloria, quæ magni penditur,
Sacris in literis, flos fæni dicitur,
Vt leue folium, quod vento rapitur,
Sic vita hominum, hac vita tollitur._
The brauerie of this world, estéemed here so much,
In Scripture likened is, to flowre of grasse and such:
Like as the leafe so light, through winde abrode is blowne,
So life in this our life, full soone is ouerthrowne.[4]
[1] "These eight verses of St. Bernard seem to have been extremely
popular at one period.... In the 'Paradise of Dainty Devices,' first
printed in 1576, we find translations of the same words" (Mason).
[2] Who. 1577.
[3] unsteady. 1577.
[4]
.... which wind abrod doth blowe,
So doth this worldly life, the life of man bestow. 1577.
113.
¶ _Of the Authors linked Verses departing from Court to the Country._[1]
Muse not my friend to finde me here, )(For fortunes looke,[E488]
Contented with this meane estate: )(Hath changed hew:
And séeme to doo with willing chéere, )(And I my booke,
That courtier doth so deadly hate. )(Must learne anew.
And yet of force, to learne anew, )(But where a spight,
Would much abash the dulled braine: )(Of force must bée:
I craue to iudge if this be trew, )(What is that wight,
The truant child that knowth the paine. )(May disagrée?
No, no, God wot, to disagrée, )(For lordlie bent,
Is ventring all to make or mar: )(Must learne to spare:
If fortune frowne we dailie sée, )(And be content
It is not best to striue too far. )(With countrie fare.
From daintie Court to countrie fare, )(Where néede yet can,
Too daintie fed[E489] is diet strange: )(None other skill:
From cities ioy, to countrie care, )(Somtime poore man
To skillesse folke is homelie change. )(Must breake his will.
If courtlie change so breaketh will )(If court with cart
That countrie life must serue the turne: )(Must be content,[E490]
What profit then in striuing still, )(What ease to hart,
Against the prick to séeme to spurne? )(Though mind repent?
What gaine I though I doo repent, )(As néede doth make
My crotches[2] all are broke and gon: )(Old age to trot:
My woonted friends are careles bent, )(So must I take,
They feare no chance I chance vpon. )(In woorth my lot.
Now if I take in woorth my lot, )(Behold the horse
That fatall chance doth force me to, )(Must trudge for pelfe,
If ye be friends embraid[3] me not, )(And yet of forse,
But vse a friend as friends should do. )(Content it selfe.
[1] "In the edition of 1573 this piece is entitled 'Of the Author's
departing from the Court to the Country,' and the verses are printed
consecutively--four long lines and then four short lines."--M. So, in
1577.
[2] chrotches. 1577.
[3] upbraid. 1614.
114.
_The Authors life._[1]
[Sidenote: Epodium.]
Now gentle friend, if thou be kinde,
Disdaine thou not, although the lot
Will now with me no better be,
than doth appere:
Nor let it grieue, that thus I liue,
But rather gesse, for quietnesse,
As others do, so do I to,
content me here.
By leaue and loue, of God aboue,
I minde to shew, in verses few,
How through the breers, my youthfull yeeres,
haue runne their race:
And further say, why thus I stay,
And minde to liue, as Bee in hiue,
Full bent to spend my life to an end,
in this same place.[2]
[Sidenote: Borne at Riuenhall in Essex.]
It came to pas, that borne I was
Of linage good, of gentle blood,
In Essex laier, in village faier,
that Riuenhall hight:
Which village lide by Banketree side,
There spend did I mine infancie,
There then my name, in honest fame,
remaind in sight.
[Sidenote: Set to song schoole.]
I yet but yong, no speech of tong,
Nor teares withall, that often fall
From mothers eies, when childe out cries,
to part hir fro:
Could pitie make, good father take,
But out I must, to song be thrust,
Say what I would, do what I could,
his minde was so.
[Sidenote: Queristers miserie.]
[Sidenote: Wallingford Colledge.]
O painfull time, for euerie crime,
What toesed eares,[E491] like baited beares!
What bobbed lips, what ierks, what nips!
what hellish toies!
What robes,[E492] how bare! what colledge fare!
What bread, how stale! what pennie Ale![E493]
Then Wallingford, how wart thou abhord
of sillie boies!
[Sidenote: Singing mens commissions.]
Thence for my voice, I must (no choice)
Away of forse, like posting horse,
For sundrie men, had plagards then,[E494]
such childe to take:
The better brest,[3][E495] the lesser rest,
To serue the Queere, now there now heere
For time so spent, I may repent,
and sorrow make.
[Sidenote: Iohn Redford an excellent Musician
[organist of St. Paul's. M.]]
But marke the chance, my self to vance,
By friendships lot, to Paules I got,
So found I grace, a certaine space,
still to remaine:
With Redford there, the like no where,
For cunning such, and vertue much,
By whom some part of Musicke art,
so did I gaine.
[Sidenote: Nicholas Vdall[E496] schoolmaster at Eton.]
From Paules I went, to Eaton sent,
To learn streight waies, the latin phraies,
Where fiftie three stripes giuen to mee,
at once I had:
For fault but small, or none at all,
It came to pas, thus beat I was,
See Udall see, the mercie of thee,
to me poore lad.
[Sidenote: Trinitie hall in Cambridge.]
From London hence, to Cambridge thence,
With thanks to thee, O Trinitee,
That to thy hall, so passing all,[4]
I got at last:
There ioy I felt, there trim I dwelt,
There heauen from hell, I shifted well,
With learned men, a number then,
the time I past.
[Sidenote: Quartan ague.]
[Sidenote: Lord Paget good to his seruants.]
Long sicknes had, then was I glad
To leaue my booke, to proue and looke,
In Court what gaine, by taking paine,
mought well be found:
Lord Paget than, that noble man,
Whose soule I trust is with the iust,
That same was hee enriched mee,
with many a pound.
[Sidenote: The hope we haue of the dead.]
When[5] this betide, good parents dide,
One after one, till both were gone,
Whose petigree, who list may see,
in Harolds Booke:[E497]
Whose soules in blis be long ere this,
For hope we must, as God is iust,
So here that craue shall mercie haue,
that mercie looke.
[Sidenote: The vices of the Court.]
By Court I spide, and ten yeres tride
That Cards and Dice, with Venus vice,
And peeuish pride, from vertue wide,
with some so wraught:
That Tiburne play[E498] made them away,
Or beggers state as euill to hate,
By such like euils, I saw such dreuils,
to come to naught.
[Sidenote: The Court commended.]
Yet is it not to be forgot,
In Court that some to worship come,
And some in time to honour clime,
and speede full well:
Some haue such gift, that trim they shift,
Some profite make, by paines they take,
In perill much, though oft are such,
in Court that dwell.
[Sidenote: The nobilitie at variance in
Edward the 6 daies.]
[Sidenote: Katewade.]
When court gan frowne and strife in towne,
And lords and knights, saw heauie sights,
Then tooke I wife, and led my life
in Suffolke soile.
There was I faine my selfe to traine,
To learne too long the fermers song,
For hope of pelfe, like worldly elfe,
to moile and toile.
[Sidenote: At Katewade in Suffolke this
booke first deuised.]
As in this booke, who list to looke,
Of husbandrie, and huswiferie,
There may he finde more of my minde,
concerning this:
To carke[6] and care, and euer bare,
With losse and paine, to little gaine,
All this to haue, to cram sir knaue,
what life it is.
[Sidenote: Ipswich commended.]
When wife could not, through sicknes got,
More toile abide, so nigh Sea side,
Then thought I best, from toile to rest,
and Ipswich trie:
A towne of price,[E499] like paradice,
For quiet then, and honest men,
There was I glad, much friendship had,
a time to lie.
[Sidenote: The deth of his first wife.]
There left good wife this present life,
And there left I, house charges lie,
For glad was he, mought send for me,
good lucke so stood:
In Suffolke there, were euerie where,
Euen of the best, besides the rest,
That neuer did their friendship hid,
to doo me good.
[Sidenote: Newe maried in Norfolk.]
O Suffolke thow, content thee now,
That hadst the praies in those same daies,
For Squiers and Knights, that well delights
good house to keepe:
For Norfolke wiles, so full of giles,[E500]
Haue caught my toe, by wiuing so,
That out to thee, I see for mee,
no waie to creepe.
[Sidenote: Mistres Amie Moone.]
For lo, through gile, what haps the while,
Through Venus toies, in hope of ioies,
I chanced soone to find a Moone,[7]
of cheerfull hew:
Which well a fine me thought did shine,
Did neuer change, a thing most strange,
Yet kept in sight, hir course aright,
and compas trew.
[Sidenote: The charges following a yoong wife.]
Behold of truth, with wife in youth,
For ioie at large, what daily charge,
Through childrens hap, what opened gap,
to more begun.
The childe at nurse, to rob the purse,
The same to wed, to trouble hed.
For pleasure rare, such endlesse care,
hath husband wun.
[Sidenote: West Diram Abbie.]
[Sidenote: Land-lordes at variance.]
Then did I dwell in Diram sell,[E501]
A place for wood, that trimlie stood,
With flesh and fish, as heart would wish:
but when I spide
That Lord with Lord could not accord,
But now pound he, and now pound we,
Then left I all, bicause such brall,
I list not bide.
[Sidenote: Sir Richard Soothwell.]
O Soothwell, what meanst thou by that,
Thou worthie wight, thou famous knight,
So me to craue, and to thy graue,
go by and by?
O death thou fo, why didst thou so
Ungently treat that Iewell great,
Which opte his doore to rich and poore,
so bounteously?
[Sidenote: His vij executors.]
There thus bestad, when leaue I had,
By death of him, to sinke or swim,
And rauens I saw togither draw,
in such a sort:
Then waies I saught, by wisdome taught,
To beare low saile, least stock should quaile,
Till ship mought finde, with prosperous winde,
some safer port.
[Sidenote: Norwich Citie.]
[Sidenote: Norwich qualities.]
At length by vew, to shore I drew,
Discharging straight both ship and fraight,
At Norwich fine, for me and mine,
a citie trim:
Where strangers wel may seeme to dwel,
That pitch and pay, or keepe their day,
But who that want, shall find it scant
so good for him.
[Sidenote: Maister Salisburie deane of Norwich.]
But Salisburie how were kept my vow,
If praise from thee were kept by mee,
Thou gentle deane, mine onely meane,
there then to liue?
Though churles such some to craue can come,
And pray once got, regard thee not,
Yet liue or die, so will not I,
example giue.
[Sidenote: In 138 houres I neuer made drop of
water.]
When learned men could there nor then,
Deuise to swage the stormie rage,
Nor yet the furie of my dissurie,
that long I had:
From Norwich aire, in great despaire,
Away to flie, or else to die,
To seeke more helth, to seeke more welth,
then was I glad.
[Sidenote: Faiersted parsonage in Essex.]
From thence so sent, away I went,
With sicknes worne, as one forlorne,
To house my hed, at Faiersted,[E502]
where whiles I dwelt:
The tithing life, the tithing strife,
Through tithing ill, of Jacke and Gill,
The dailie paies, the mierie waies,
too long I felt.
[Sidenote: Lease for parsons life.]
When charges grew, still new and new,
And that I spide, if parson dide,
(All hope in vaine) to hope for gaine,
I might go daunce:
Once rid my hand of parsonage land,
Thence by and by, away went I,
To London streight, to hope and waight,
for better chaunce.
[Sidenote: London commended.]
Well London well, that bearst the bell
Of praise about, England throughout,
And dost in deede, to such as neede,
much kindnes shew:
Who that with thee can hardly agree,
Nor can well prais thy friendly wais,
Shall friendship find, to please his mind,
in places few.
[Sidenote: Vnthrifts order.]
As for such mates, as vertue hates,
Or he or thay, that go so gay,
That needes he must take all of trust,
for him and his:
Though such for we by Lothburie go,
For being spide about Cheapeside,
Least Mercers bookes for monie lookes,
small matter it is.
[Sidenote: The plague at London [1574, 1575].[E503]]
[Sidenote: Trinitie College in Cambridge.]
When gaines was gon, and yeres grew on,
And death did crie, from London flie,
In Cambridge then, I found agen,
a resting plot:
In Colledge best of all the rest,
With thanks to thee, O Trinitee,[8]
Through thee and thine, for me and mine,
some stay I got.
[Sidenote: Youth ill spent makes age repent.]
32[E504]
Since hap haps so, let toiling go,
Let seruing paines yeeld forth hir gaines,
Let courtly giftes, with wedding shiftes,
helpe now to liue:
Let Musicke win, let stocke come in,
Let wisedome kerue, let reason serue,
For here I craue such end to haue,
as God shall giue.
[Sidenote: A lesson for yonger brothers.]
Thus friends, by me perceiue may ye,
That gentrie standes, not all by landes,[E505]
Nor all so feft, or plentie left
by parents gift:
But now and then, of gentlemen,
The yonger sonne is driuen to ronne,
And glad to seeke from creeke to creeke,
to come by thrift.
[Sidenote: A true lesson.]
And more by this, to conster is,
In world is set, ynough to get,
But where and whan, that scarsely can,
the wisest tell:
By learning some to riches come,
By ship and plough some get ynough,
And some so wiue that trim they thriue,
and speede full well.
[Sidenote: Hardnes in youth not the worst.]
[Sidenote: Cocking of youth not the best.]
To this before, adde one thing more,
Youth hardnes taught, with knowledge wraught,
Most apt do prooue, to shift and shooue,
among the best:
Where cocking Dads[E506] make sawsie lads,
In youth so rage, to beg in age,
Or else to fetch a Tibourne stretch,
among the rest.
[Sidenote: Not pride in youth, but welth in age
needfull.]
Not rampish toie, of girle and boie,
Nor garment trim, of hir or him,[E507]
In childhoode spent, to fond intent,
good end doth frame:
If marke we shall, the summe of all,
The end it is, that noted is,
Which if it bide, with vertue tride,
deserueth fame.
[Sidenote: Man doth labour and God doth blesse.]
When all is done, lerne this my sonne,
Not friend, nor skill, nor wit at will,
Nor ship nor clod, but onelie God,
doth all in all:
Man taketh paine, God giueth gaine,
Man doth his best, God doth the rest,
Man well intendes, God foizon sendes,
else want he shall.[E508]
[Sidenote: A contented minde is worth all.]
Some seeke for welth, I seeke my helth,
Some seeke to please, I seeke mine ease,
Some seeke to saue, I seeke to haue
to liue vpright:
More than to ride, with pompe and pride,
Or for to iet,[9][E509] in others det,
Such is my skill, and shall be still,
for any wight.
Too fond were I, here thus to lie,
Unles that welth mought further helth,
And profit some should thereby come,
to helpe withall:
This causeth mee well pleasde to bee,
Such drift to make, such life to take,
Enforsing minde remorse to finde,
as neede neede shall.
[Sidenote: Happie that liues well, vnhappie
dies euill.]
Friend, al thing waid, that here is said,
And being got, that paies the shot,
Me thinke of right haue leaue I might,
(death drawing neere:)
To seeke some waies, my God to praies,
And mercy craue, in time to haue,
And for the rest, what he thinkes best,
to suffer heere.
[1] First added to the 1573 edition.--M.
[2] "The author means London; but though it is believed he died there,
it is evident from the sequel, that he left it on account of the
plague."--M.
[3] Cf. Shakespere's Twelfth Night, ii. 3.
[4] "Till it was repaired, between 1740 and 1750, it is said to have
been but a poor-looking place; and which is reported to have been
characterized by Dr. Mar, the Vice-Chancellor, when speaking of it to
the King of Denmark, as _le petit coigne._"--M.
[5] While. 1577.
[6] carp. 1573.
[7] His second wife.
[8] Founded in 1546.
[9] set. 1573.
FINIS.
[Of edition of 1580, but see over.]
[115.]
_Of Fortune._
The following poem is not to be found after the edition of 1573 and its
reprint of 1577.--M.
_Fortuna non est semper amica,
Superbiam igitur semper devita._
Though Fortune smiles, and fawnes vpon thy side,
Thyself extol for that no whit the more;
Though Fortune frownes and wresteth al thing wide,
Let fancy stay, keepe courage still in store;
For chance may change as chance hath don before:
Thus shalt thou holde more safe then honour got,
Or lose the losse,[1] though Fortune will or not.
Thy friend at this shall dayly comfort haue,
When warely thus, thou bearest thy selfe vpright,
Thy foes at this shall gladly friendship craue,
When hope so small is left to wrecke their spight,
For lowly liefe withstandeth enuy quight:
As floeting ship, by bearing sayl alowe,
Withstandeth stormes when boistrous winds do blowe.
Thy vsage thus in time shall win the gole,
Though doughtful haps, dame fortune sendes betweene,
And thou shalt see thine enemies blow the cole,
To ease thine hart much more then thou dost weene,
Ye though a change most strangely should be seene,
Yet friend at neede shall secret friendship make,
When foe in deede shal want his part to take.
[1] lesse. M.
_A Table of the points of Huswiferie mentioned in this Booke._
The Authors Epistle to the Ladie Paget.
The Authors Epistle to the Reader.
The Authors Preface to his booke of huswiferie.
The praise of huswiferie.
A description of huswife and huswiferie.
Instructions to huswiferie.
A digression to cockcrowing.
Huswiferie morning workes.
Huswifelie breakefast workes.
Huswifelie admonitions or lessons.
Brewing.
Baking.
Cookerie.
Dairie.
Scouring.
Washing.
Malting.
Dinner time huswiferie.
Huswifelie afternoone workes.
Huswifelie Euening workes.
Supper time huswiferie.
After Supper workes of huswiferie.
Of bedtime in winter and sommer.
The times to rise in winter and sommer.
Of bearing and forbearing.
The Ploughmans feasting daies.
The good huswifelie physicke.
The good motherlie nurserie.
A precept of thinking on the poore.
A comparison betwéene good huswiferie and bad.
The meanes for children to attaine to learning.
A description of womans age from fourtéene to fourescore and foure.
The Inholders posie.
Certaine table lessons.
Lessons for waiting seruantes.
Husbandly posies for ye hal.
Posies for the Parler.
Posies for the gestes chamber.
Posies for thine own bed chamber.
A Sonet to the Ladie Paget.
Principall pointes of Religion.
The Authors beliefe.
Of the omnipotencie of God and debilitie of man.
Of almesdéedes.
Of _malus homo_.
Of two sortes of people.
Of what force the deuill is if he be resisted.
Eight of Saint Barnards verses in Latine and English, to be soong both
by one note.
Of the Authors departing from the Court.
The Authors life of his owne penning.
[Of Fortune.]
FINIS.
¶ Imprinted at London, by Henrie Denham, dwelling at Paternoster Row,
at the figure of the Starre, being the assigne of William Seres.
Cum priuilegio Regiæ Maiestatis.
¶ A hundreth good pointes of husbandrie.
A hundreth good pointes, of good husbandry,
maintaineth good household, with huswifry.
Housekeping and husbandry, if it be good:
must loue one another, as cousinnes in blood.
The wife to, must husband as well as the man:
or farewel thy husbandry, doe what thou can.
¶ _To the right honorable and my speciall good lord and maister, the
lord Paget, Lord priuie seale._
T The trouth doth teache, that tyme must serue.
H (How euer man, doth blase hys mynde)
O (Of thynges most lyke, to thryue or sterue:)
M Much apt to iudge, is often blynde.
A And therfore, tyme it doth behoofe:
S Shall make of trouth, a perfit proofe.
T Take you my lord, and mayster than,
U (Unlesse mischaunce mischaunseth me:)
S Such homely gyft, of your own man,
S Synce more in court, I may not be:
E and let your praise, wonne here tofore,
R Remayne abrode, for euermore.
M My seruyng you, thus vnderstande,
A And god his helpe, and yours withall:
D Dyd cause good lucke, to take myne hande
E Erecting one, most lyke to fall:
E Enforced this, to come to passe.
S So synce I was, at Cambridge tought,
O Of court ten yeres, I made a say;
N No musike than, was left vnsought,
A A care I had, to serue that way,
M My ioye gan slake, then made I chaunge,
E Expulsed myrth, for musike straunge.
M My musike synce, hath been the plough,
E Entangled with, some care among:
T The gayn not great, the payn enough,
H Hath made me syng, another song.
A And if I may, my song auowe;
N No man I craue, to iudge but you.
¶ Your seruant,
Thomas Tusser.
¶ _Concordia paruæ res crescunt
Discordia maximæ dilabuntur._
Where couples agree not, is rancor and poysen,
where they two kepe house, than is neuer no foysen:
But contrary lightly, where couples agree,
what chaunseth by wisdom, looke after to see.
Good husbandes, that loueth good housholdes to kepe,
be sometime full carefull, when others do slepe:
for running behinde hand, or feare of the wurst.
Then count with thy purse, when thy haruest is in,
thy cardes being tolde, how to saue or to win:
But win or els saue, or els passe not to farre,
For hoping to make, least thou happen to marre.
Make money thy drudge, for to folow thy warke,
and Wisdom thy steward, good Order thy clarke:
Prouision thy cator, and all shall goe well,
for foysen is there, where prouision doth dwell.
With some folke on sundayes, their tables do reke:
and halfe the weke after, their diners to seke.
At no tyme to much, but haue alway ynough:
is housholdy fare, and the guyse of the plough.
For what shal it profet, ynough to prouide,
and then haue it spoiled, or filched aside:
As twenty lode busshes, cut downe at a clappe,
such hede may be taken, shall stoppe but a gappe.
Good labouring threshers, are worthy to eate,
Good husbandly ploughmen, deserueth their meate,
Good huswiuely huswiues, that let for no rest,
should eate when they list, and should drinke of the best.
Beware raskabilia, slouthfull to wurke,
proloiners and filchers, that loue for to lurke:
And cherishe well willers, that serueth thy nede,
take time to thy Tutor, God sende the good spede.
¶ August.
When haruest is done, all thing placed and set,
for saultfishe and herring, then laie for to get:
The byeng of them, comming first vnto rode,
shal pay for thy charges, thou spendest abrode.
10.
Thy saultfishe well chosen, not burnt at the stone,
or drye them thyselfe, (hauing skill is a lone:)
Brought salfe to thy house, would be packed vp drie,
with pease strawe betweene, least it rot as it lie.
11.
Or euer thou ride, with thy seruauntes compound,
to carry thy muckhilles, on thy barley ground:
One aker wel compast, is worth akers three,
at haruest, thy barne shall declare it to thee.
12.
This good shalt thou learne, with thy riding about,
the prises of thinges, all the yere thoroughout:
And what time is best, for to sell that thou haue,
and how for to bye, to be likely to saue.
13.
For bying and selling, doth wonderfull well,
to him that hath wit, how to by and to sell:
But chopping and chaungeing, may make such a breck,
that gone is thy winninges, for sauing thy neck.
14.
The riche man, his bargaines are neuer vnsought,
the seller will fynde him, he nede not take thought:
But herein consisteth, a part of our text,
who byeth at first hand, and who at the next.
15.
He byeth at first hand, that ventreth his golde,
he byeth at second, that dare not be bolde:
He byeth at third hand, that nedes borrow must,
who byeth of him, than shall pay for his lust.
16.
When euer thou bargain, for better or wurse,
let alway one bargain, remain in thy purse:
Good credit doth well, but good credit to kepe,
is pay and dispatche him, or euer thou slepe.
17.
Be mindeful abrode, of thy Mighelmas spring,
for theron dependeth, a marueilous thing:
When gentiles vse walking, with hawkes on their handes,
Good husbandes, with grasing doe purchase their landes.
18.
And as thou come homeward, bye xl. good crones,
and fatte me the bodies, of those sely bones:
With those and thy swine, or and shrouetyde be past,
thy folke shal fare well, where as others shal fast.
19.
Thy saffron plot, pared in saint mary daies,
for pleasure and profit, shal serue many waies:
With twenty foote square, knowing how for to doo,
shal stede both thine own house, and next neighbour too.
¶ September.
20.
Threshe sede and goe fanne, for the plough may not lye,
September doth bid, to be sowing of rye:
The redges well harrowde, or euer thou strike,
is one poynt of husbandry, rye land do like.
21.
Geue winter corne leaue, for to haue full his lust,
sowe wheate as thou mayst, but sowe rye in the dust:
Be carefull for sede, for such sede as thou sowe,
as true as thou liuest, loke iustly to mowe.
22.
The sede being sowne, waterforow thy ground,
that rain, when it cummeth, may runne away round:
The diches kept skowred, the hedge clad with thorne,
doth well to drayne water, and saueth thy corne.
23.
Then furth with thy slinges, and thine arowes & bowes,
till ridges be grene, kepe the corne from the crowes:
A good boye abrode, by the day starre appere,
shall skare good man crowe, that he dare not come nere.
24.
At Mihelmas, mast would be loked vpon,
and lay to get some, or the mast time be gon:
It saueth thy corne well, it fatteth thy swyne;
In frost it doth helpe them, where els they should pine.
¶ October.
25.
The rye in the ground, while September doth last:
October for wheate sowing, calleth as fast.
What euer it cost thee, what euer thou geue,
have done sowing wheate, before halowmas eve.
26.
The mone in the wane, gather fruit on the tree,
the riper, the better for graffe and for thee.
But michers, that loue not to bie nor to craue:
make some gather sooner, els fewe should they haue.
27.
Or winter doe come, while the weather is good:
for gutting thy grounde, get the home with thy wood.
Set bauen alone, lay the bowghes from the blockes:
the drier, the les maidens dablith their dockes.
28.
For rooting thy grounde, ring thy hogges thou hast nede
the better thou ring them, the better they fede.
Most times with their elders, the yong ones kepe best:
then yoke well the great knaues, and fauour the rest.
29.
But yoke not thy swine, while thine akorne time last:
for diuers misfortunes, that happen to fast.
Or if thou loue eared, and vnmaimed hogges:
giue eie to thy neighbour, and eare to his dogges.
¶ November.
30.
Get vp with thy barley lande, dry as thou can:
at March (as thou layest it) so loke for it than.
Get euer before hande, drag neuer behinde:
least winter beclip thee, and breake of thy minde.
31.
At Hallowmas, slaughter time sone commeth in:
and than doth the husbande mans feasting begin.
From that time, to Candlemas weekely kill some:
their offal for household, the better shal come.
32.
All soules that be thursty, bid threshe out for mawlt:
well handled and tended, or els thou dost nawlt.
Thencrease of one strike is a pek for thy store:
the maker is bad els, or pilfreth the more.
33.
For Easter, at Martilmas hange vp a biefe:
for pease fed and stall fed, play pickpurse the thiefe.
With that and fat bakon, till grasse biefe come in:
thy folke shall loke cherely, when others loke thin.
34.
Set gardeine beanes, after saint Edmonde the king:
the Moone in the wane, theron hangeth a thing.
Thencrease of one gallonde, well proued of some:
shall pleasure thy householde, ere peskod time come.
35.
Except thou take good hede, when first they apere,
the crowes will be halfe, grow they neuer so nere.
Thinges sowne, set or graft, in good memory haue:
from beast, birde and weather to cherishe and saue.
¶ Decembre.
36.
Abrode for the raine, when thou canst do no good;
then go let thy flayles, as the threshers were wood.
Beware they threshe clene, though the lesser they yarne:
and if thou wilt thriue, loke thy selfe to thy barne.
37.
If barne rome will serue, lay thy stoouer vp drye
and eche kinde of strawe, by hitselfe let it lie.
Thy chaffe, housed sweete, kept from pullein and dust:
shall serue well thy horses, when labour they must.
38.
When pasture is gone, and the fildes mier and weate:
then stable thy plough horse, and there giue them meate.
The better thou vse them, in place where they stande:
more strength shall they haue, for to breake vp thy lande.
39.
Giue cattell their fodder, the plot drie and warme:
and count them, for miring or other like harme.
Trust neuer to boyes, if thou trust well to spede:
be serued with those, that may helpe at a nede.
40.
Serue first out thy rie strawe, then wheate & then pease,
then otestrawe then barley, then hay if you please.
But serue them with haye, while thy straw stoouer last,
they loue no more strawe, they had rather to fast.
41.
Kepe neuer such seruantes, as doth thee no good,
for making thy heare, growing thorrough thy hood.
For nestling of verlettes, of brothels and hoores:
make many a rich man, to shet vp his doores.
¶ Christmas.
42.
Get Iuye and hull, woman deck vp thyne house:
and take this same brawne, for to seeth and to souse.
Prouide vs good chere, for thou knowst the old guise:
olde customes, that good be, let no man dispise.
43.
At Christmas be mery, and thanke god of all:
and feast thy pore neighbours, the great with the small,
yea al the yere long, haue an eie to the poore:
and god shall sende luck, to kepe open thy doore.
44.
Good fruite and good plenty, doth well in thy loft:
then lay for an orcharde, and cherishe it oft.
The profet is mickell, the pleasure is mutch;
at pleasure with profet, few wise men will grutch.
45.
For plantes and for stockes, lay afore hand to cast:
but set or remoue them, while twelue tide doe last.
Set one from another, full twenty fote square:
the better and greater, they yerely will bare.
¶ January.
46.
When Christmas is done, kepe not Christmas time still:
be mindefull of rering, and loth for to kill.
For then, what thou rerist thou nede not to dout:
will double thy gaine, ere the yere come about.
47.
Be gredy to spende all, and careles to saue:
and shortly be nedy, and redy to craue.
be wilfull to kill, and vnskilfull to store:
and sone giue vp houskeping, longe any more.
48.
Thy calues then, that come betwene new yere and lent:
saue gladly for store, lest thou after repent.
For all thing at that time, that colde feleth some:
shall better beare colde, when the next winter come.
49.
Weane no time thy calfe, vnder xl daies olde:
and lay for to saue it, as thou sauest golde.
yet calues that doe fal, betwene change and the prime:
pas seldome to rere them, but kill them in time.
50.
For stores of thy swine, be thou carefull betwix:
of one sow at one time, rere seldome past six.
The fewe that she kepe, much the better shal bee:
of all thing, one good is worth steruelinges three.
51.
Geld vnder the dame, within fornight at least:
and saue both thy money, and life of the beast.
But gelde with the gelder, as many one doe:
and of halfe a dosen, go geld away two.
52.
Thy coltes for the sadle, geld yong to be light:
for cart doe not so, if thou iudgest a right.
Nor geld not, but when they be lusty and fat:
53.
Geld marefoles, but titts ere and nine dayes of age:
they die els of gelding, some gelders wil gage.
But marefoles, both likely of bulke and of bone:
kepe such to bring coltes, let their gelding alone.
54.
For gaining a trifle, sell neuer thy store:
for chaunsing on worse, then thine owne were before.
More larger of body, the better for brede:
more forward of growing, the better they spede.
55.
Thy sowes, great with fare, that come best for to rere:
loke dayly thou seest them, and count them full dere.
For that time, the losse of one fare of thy sowe:
is greater, then losse of two calues of thy kowe.
56.
A kow good of milk, big of bulke, hayle and sounde,
is yerely for profet, as good as a pounde.
And yet, by the yere haue I proued ere now:
as good to the purse, is a sow as a kow.
57.
Kepe one and kepe both, so thou maist if thou wilt:
then all shall be saued, and nothing be spilt.
Kepe two bease, and one sow, and liue at thine ease:
and no time for nede, bye thy meate but thou please.
58.
Who both by his calues, and his lambes will be knowne:
may well kill a neate, and a shepe of his owne.
And he, that will rere vp a pig in his house:
shall eate sweter bakon, and cheaper fed sowse.
59.
But eate vp thy veale, pig and lambe being froth:
and twise in a weeke, go to bed without broth.
As that man that pas not, but sell away sell:
shall neuer kepe good house, where euer he dwell.
60.
Spende none but thyne owne, howsoeuer thou spende:
nor haft not to god ward, for that he doth sende.
Tythe truly for al thing, let pas of the rest:
the iust man, his dealinges god prospereth best.
61.
In January, husbandes that powcheth the grotes:
will breake vp their lay, or be sowing of otes.
Sow Jauiuer Otes, and lay them by thy wheate;
in May, bye thy hay for thy cattel to eate.
¶ Februarij.
62.
In Feuerell, rest not for taking thine ease:
get into the grounde with thy beanes, and thy pease.
Sow peason betimes, and betimes they will come:
the sooner, the better they fill vp a rome.
63.
In euery grene, where the fence is not thine:
the thornes stub out cleane, that the grasse may be fine.
Thy neighbours wil borow, els hack them beliue:
so neither thy grasse, nor the bushes shall thriue.
64.
Thy seruant, in walking thy pastures aboute:
for yokes, forkes and rakes, let him loke to finde oute.
And after at leyser let this be his hier:
to trimme them and make them at home by the fier.
65.
When frostes will not suffer to ditche nor to hedge:
then get the an heate, with thy betill and wedge.
A blocke at the harthe, cowched close for thy life:
shall helpe to saue fier bote, and please well thy wife.
66.
Then lop for thy fewel, the powlinges well growen:
that hindreth the corne, or the grasse to be mowen.
In lopping, and cropping, saue Edder and stake
thyne hedges, where nede is to mende or to make.
67.
No stick, nor no stone, leaue vnpicked vp clene:
for hurting thy sieth, or for harming thy grene.
For sauing of al thing, get home with the rest,
the snow frozen hardest, thy cart may goe best.
68.
Spare meddowes at shroftide, spare marshes at paske:
for feare of a drougth, neuer longer time aske.
Then hedge them, and ditche them, bestow thereon pence:
for meddow and corne, craueth euer good fence.
69.
And alway, let this be a part of thy care:
Then seauer thy groundes, and so keping them still:
finde cattel at ease, and haue pasture at will.
¶ Marche.
70.
In Marche, sow thy barley thy londe not to colde:
the drier the better, a hundreth times tolde.
That tilth harrowde finely, set sede time an ende:
and praise, and pray God a good haruest to sende.
71.
Sow wheate in a meane, sow thy Rie not to thin;
let peason and beanes, here and there, take therein.
Sow barley and otes, good and thick doe not spare:
giue lande leaue, her sede or her wede for to bare.
72.
For barley and pease, harrow after thou sowe:
for rye, harrow first seldome after I trowe.
Let wheat haue a clodde, for to couer the hedde:
that after a frost, it may out and goe spredde.
¶ A digression from husbandrie:
to a poynt or two of huswifrie.
[72a]
Now here I think nedeful, a pawse for to make;
to treate of some paines, a good huswife must take.
For huswifes must husbande, as wel as the man:
or farewel thy husbandrie, do what thou can.
[72b]
In Marche, and in Aprill, from morning to night:
in sowing and setting, good huswiues delight.
To haue in their gardein, or some other plot:
to trim vp their house, and to furnish their pot.
[72c]
Haue millons at Mihelmas, parsneps in lent:
in June, buttred beanes, saueth fish to be spent.
With those, and good pottage inough hauing than:
thou winnest the heart, of thy laboring man.
¶ Aprill.
[72d]
From Aprill begin, til saint Andrew be past:
so long with good huswiues, their dairies doe last.
Good milche bease and pasture, good husbandes prouide:
good huswiues know best, all the rest how to guide.
[72e]
But huswiues, that learne not to make their owne cheese:
with trusting of others, haue this for their feese.
Their milke slapt in corners, their creame al to sost:
their milk pannes so flotte, that their cheeses be lost.
[72f]
Where some of a kowe, maketh yerely a pounde:
these huswiues crye creake, for their voice will not sounde.
The seruauntes, suspecting their dame lye in waighte:
with one thing or other, they trudge away straight.
[72g]
Then neighbour (for gods sake) if any such bee;
if you know a good seruant, waine her to mee.
Such maister, suche man, and such mistres suche mayde
such husbandes and huswiues, suche houses araide.
[72h]
For flax and for hemp, for to haue of her owne:
the wife must in May, take good hede it be sowne.
And trimme it, and kepe it to serue at a nede:
the femble to spin, and the karle for her sede.
[72i]
Good husbandes, abrode seketh al well to haue:
good huswiues, at home seketh al well to saue.
Thus hauing and sauing, in place where they meete:
make profit with pleasure, suche couples to greete.
¶ May.
73.
Both Philip and Jacob, bid put of thy lammes:
that thinkest to haue any milke of their dammes.
But Lammas aduiseth thee, milke not to long:
for hardnes make pouerty, skabbed among.
74.
To milke and to folde them, is much to require:
except thou haue pasture, to fill their desire.
But nightes being shorte, and such hede thou mayst take
not hurting their bodies, much profit to make.
75.
Milke six ewes, for one kowe, well chosen therefore:
and double thy dayrie, els trust me no more.
And yet may good huswiues, that knoweth the skill:
haue mixt or vnmixt, at their pleasure and will.
76.
For gredy of gaine, ouerlay not thy grownde:
and then shall thy cattell, be lusty and sownde.
But pinche them of pasture, while sommer time last:
and plucke at their tailes, ere & winter be past.
77.
Pinche weannels at no time, of water nor meate:
if euer thou hope to have them good neate.
In sommer at al times, in winter in frost:
if cattell lacke drinke, they be vtterly lost.
78.
In May at the furdest, twy fallow thy lande:
much drougth may cause after, thy plough els to stande.
That tilth being done, thou hast passed the wurste:
then after, who plowgheth, plowgh thou with the furste.
¶ June.
79.
In June get thy wedehoke, thy knife and thy gloue:
and wede out such wede, as the corne doth not loue.
Slack no time thy weding, for darth nor for cheape:
thy corne shall reward it, or euer thou reape.
80.
The maywede doth burne, and the thistle doth freate:
the Tine pulleth downe, both the rie and the wheate.
The dock and the brake, noieth corne very much:
but bodle for barley, no weede there is such.
81.
In June washe thy shepe, where the water doth runne:
and kepe them from dust, but not kepe them from sunne
Then share them and spare not, at two daies anende,
the sooner, the better their bodies amende.
82.
Rewarde not the shepe, when thou takest his cote:
with two or three patches, as brode as a grote;
The flie than and wormes, will compel it to pine:
more paine to thy cattell, more trouble is thine.
83.
But share not thy lammes, till mid July be worne:
the better their cotes will be growne to be shorne.
The pie will discharge thee, for pulling the reste:
the lighter the shepe is, then fedeth it beste.
84.
Saint Mihel byd bees, to be brent out of strife:
sajnt John bid take honey, with fauour of life.
For one sely cottage, set south good and warme:
take body and goodes, and twise yerely a swarme.
85.
At Christmas take hede, if their hiues be to light:
take honey and water, together wel dight.
That mixed with strawes, in a dish in their hiues:
they drowne not, they fight not, thou sauest their lyues.
86.
At midsommer downe with thy brimbles and brakes:
and after abrode, with thy forkes and thy rakes.
Set mowers a worke, while the meddowes be growne;
the lenger they stande, so much worse to be mowne.
87.
Prouide of thine owne, to haue all thing at hande:
els worke and the workman, shall oftentimes stande.
Loue seldome to borow, that thinkest to saue;
who lendeth the one, will loke two thinges to haue.
88.
Good husbandes that laye, to saue all thing vpright:
for Tumbrels and cartes, haue a shed redy dight.
A store house for trinkets kept close as a iayle:
that nothing be wanting, the worthe of a nayle.
89.
Thy cartes would be searched, withoute and within;
well cloughted and greased, or hay time begin.
Thy hay being caried, though carters had sworne:
the cartes bottome borded, is sauing of corne.
¶ Julii.
90.
Then muster thy folke, play the captaine thyselfe:
prouiding them weapon, and suche kinde of pelfe.
Get bottels and bagges, kepe the fielde in the heate:
the feare is not muche, but the daunger is great.
91.
With tossing and raking, and setting on cox:
the grasse that was grene, is now hay for an ox.
That done, leaue the tieth, lode thy cart and awaye:
the battell is fought, thou hast gotten the daye.
92.
Then doune with thy hedlondes, thy corne rounde about
leaue neuer a dalop, vnmoune or had out.
Though grasse be but thinne, about barley and pease:
yet picked vp clene, it shall do thee good ease.
93.
Thryfallowe betime, for destroing of weede:
least thistle and dock, fall a bloming and seede.
Such season may hap, it shall stande the vpon:
to till it againe, or the somer be gone.
94.
And better thou warte, so to doe for thy hast:
then (hardnes) for slougth make thy lande to lie wast.
A redy good forehorse, is dainty to finde:
be hindred at first, and come alway behinde.
95.
Thy houses and barnes, would be loked vpon:
and all thing amended, or haruest come on.
Thinges thus set in ordre, at quiet and rest:
thy haruest goeth forwarde and prospereth best.
96.
Sainct James willeth husbandes, get reapers at hande:
the corne, being ripe doe but shead as it stande.
Be sauing and thankfull, for that god hath sent:
he sendeth it thee, for the selfe same entent.
97.
Reape well, scatter not, gather cleane that is shorne:
binde fast, shock a pase, pay the tenth of thy corne.
Lode salfe, carry home, lose no time, being faier:
golfe iust, in the barne, it is out of dispaier.
98.
This done, set the pore ouer all for to gleane:
and after thy cattel, to eate it vp cleane.
Then spare it for pasture, till rowen be past:
to lengthen thy dayrey, no better thou hast.
99.
Then welcome thy haruest folke, seruauntes and all:
with mirth and good chere, let them furnish thine hall.
The haruest lorde nightly, must geue the a song:
fill him then the blacke boll, or els he hath wrong.
100.
Thy haruest thus ended, in myrth and in ioye:
please euery one gently, man woman and boye.
Thus doing, with alway, such helpe as they can:
thou winnest the name, of a right husband man.
_Finis._
Nowe thinke vpon god, let thy tonge neuer cease:
from thanking of him, for his myghty encrease.
Accept my good wil, finde no fault tyll thou trye:
the better thou thryuest, the gladder am I.
¶ _A sonet or brief rehersall of the properties of the twelue monethes
afore rehersed._
As Janeuer fryse pot, bidth corne kepe hym lowe:
And feuerell fill dyke, doth good with his snowe:
A bushel of Marche dust, worth raunsomes of gold
And Aprill his stormes, be to good to be solde:
As May with his flowers, geue ladies their lust:
And June after blooming, set carnels so iust:
As July bid all thing, in order to ripe:
And August bid reapers, to take full their gripe.
September his fruit, biddeth gather as fast:
October bid hogges, to come eate vp his mast:
As dirtie Nouember, bid threshe at thine ease:
December bid Christmas, to spende what he please:
So wisdom bid kepe, and prouide while we may:
For age crepeth on as the time passeth away.
Finis.
Thinges thriftie, that teacheth the thriuing to thriue;
teache timely to trauas, the thing that thou triue.
Transferring thy toyle, to the times truely tought:
that teacheth the temperaunce, to temper thy thought.
To temper thy trauaile, to tarrye the tide:
this teacheth the thriftines, twenty times tride.
Thinke truely to trauaile, that thinkest to thee:
the trade that thy teacher taught truely to the.
Take thankfully thinges, thanking tenderly those:
that teacheth thee thriftly, thy time to transpose.
The trouth teached two times, teache thou two times ten
this trade thou that takest, take thrift to the then.
¶ Imprinted at London in flete strete within Temple barre, at the sygne
of the hand and starre, by Richard Tottel, the third day of February,
An. 1557. _Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum._
NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.
(Notes signed M. are from Dr. Mavor's edition of 1812, and those signed
T.R. are from Hilman's _Tusser Redivivus_, 1710.)
[E1] "Er in aught be begun;" that is, before a beginning be made in
anything, the verb being used impersonally.
[E2] The directions which are stated briefly in the Abstract will be
found in the Month's Husbandry in the stanza bearing the same number.
[E3] "Pilcrowe," the mark of a new paragraph in printing (¶). A
corruption of _paragraph_, through _parcraft, pilcraft_, to _pilcrow_.
"Paragrapha, _pylcraft_ in wrytynge."--Medulla Gramm. "_Paragraphus,
Anglice_ a pargrafte in wrytynge."--Ortus. "Paragraphe or _Pillcrow_,
a full sentence, head or title."--Cotgrave. "A _Pilkcrow_, vide
Paragraph."--Gouldman.
[E4] "Crosserowe." "Shee that knowes where Christes crosse stands, will
neuer forget where great A dwells."--Tom Tell-Trothe's New Year's Gift
(New Shakspere Soc. ed. Furnivall), p. 33. "The Christs-crosse-row or
Horne-booke, wherein a child learnes it."--Cotgrave. The alphabet was
called the _Christ-cross-row_, some say because a cross was prefixed to
the alphabet in the old primers; but as probably from a superstitious
custom of writing the alphabet in the form of a cross as a charm. This
was even solemnly practised by the Bishop in the consecration of a
church. See Picart's Relig. Ceremonies, vol. i. p. 131.--Nares.
[E5] "A medicine for the cowlaske." In Sloane MS. 1585, f. 152, will be
found a recipe for the cure of diarrhœa, the components of which appear
to be the yolk of a new-laid egg, honey, and fine salt.
[E6] In the edition of 1557, the first stanza of the Epistle reads
somewhat differently; see p. 220.
[E7] "Time trieth the troth," in Latin "Veritas temporis filia," occurs
in Tottel's Miscellany, 1557, repr. 1867, p. 221.--Hazlitt's English
Proverbs.
[E8] "Vnlesse mischance mischanceth me" = unless fortune is unkind to
me.
[E9] "Remaine abrode for euermore," _i.e._ be given to the writings of
others.
[E10] It is noticeable that though in the Author's Epistle he spells
his name, most probably for convenience sake, as Tuss_a_r, he on all
other occasions spells it Tuss_e_r, which is no doubt correct. In the
edition of 1557 the name is spelt correctly, although the corresponding
line of the stanza commences with the letter _a_. See p. 220.
[E11] "Like Iugurth, Prince of Numid." Jugurtha, an illegitimate son of
Mastanabal, after the death of Micipsa murdered his two sons and seized
on the sovereignty of Numidia. War was declared against him by the
Romans, and after some time Metellus drove him to such extremes that
he was obliged to take refuge with his father-in-law, Bocchus, by whom
he was given up to Marius, was carried in triumph to Rome, and finally
starved to death. The history of the war against him is related in
Sallust's _Bellum Jugurthinum_.
[E12] "With losses so perfumid;" _i.e._ pervaded, thoroughly imbued; we
use _imbued_ nearly in the same way.
[E13] Harrison, in his Description of England (E.E.T. Soc. ed.
Furnivall, part i. p. 241), gives a very bad character to the landlords
of his day: "What stocke of monie soeuer he [the farmer] gathereth and
laieth vp in all his yeares, it is often seene, that the landlord will
take such order with him for the same, when he renueth his lease, which
is commonlie eight or six yeares before the old be expired (sith it
is now growen almost to a custome, that if he come not to his lord so
long before, another shall step in for a reuersion, and so defeat him
out right) that it shall neuer trouble him more than the haire of his
beard, when the barber hath washed and shaued it from his skin. And
as they commend these, so (beside the decaie of house-keeping whereby
the poore haue beene relieued) they speake also of three things that
are growen to be verie grieuous vnto them, to wit, the inhansing of
rents, latelie mentioned; the dailie oppression of copiholders, whose
lords seeke to bring their poore tenants almost into plaine seruitude
and miserie, dailie deuising new meanes, and seeking vp all the old,
how to cut them shorter and shorter, _doubling, trebling, and now and
then seuen times increasing their fines_; driuing them also for euerie
trifle to loose and forfeit their tenures, (by whom the greatest part
of the realme dooth stand and is mainteined,) to the end they may
fleece them yet more." See also Norden's Surveyor's Dialogue, ed. 1607,
p. 51.
The following curious prayer is in Edward the Sixth's Liturgies:--"The
earth is Thine, O Lord, and all that is contained therein,
notwithstanding Thou hast given possession of it to the children of
men, to pass over the time of their short pilgrimage in this vale of
misery. We heartily pray Thee to send Thy Holy Spirit into the hearts
of those that possess the grounds, pastures, and dwelling-places of the
earth, that they, remembering themselves to be Thy tenants, may not
rack nor stretch out the rents of their houses and lands, nor yet take
unreasonable fines and incomes after the manner of covetous worldlings,
but so let them out to others, that the inhabitants thereof may both
be able to pay the rents, and also honestly to live and nourish their
families, and relieve the poor. Give them grace also to consider that
they are but strangers and pilgrims in this world, having here no
dwelling-place, but seeking one to come; that they, remembering the
short continuance of their life, may be contented with that which
is sufficient, and not join house to house and land to land, to the
impoverishment of others; but so behave themselves in letting out
their lands, tenements, and pastures, that after this life they may be
received into everlasting dwelling-places, through, etc."
[E14] "Fleeces" = fleecings, frauds, impositions. It _may_, perhaps, be
used literally, of selling wool at a loss.
[E15] "Ictus sapit." This corresponds to our proverb, "The burnt child
dreads the fire," or perhaps more nearly to "Once bit, twice shy."
In the "Proverbs of Hendyng" we find it as: "The burnt child fire
dreadeth, quoth Hendyng." Ray, in his "Collection of Proverbs," edit.
1737, says: "Piscator ictus sapit; struck by the scorpion fish, or
pastinaca, whose prickles are esteemed venomous."
[E16] If Tusser is here writing literally, the price of his book, in
"the golden days of good Queen Bess," was only a groat or two at the
utmost.--M.
[E17] "Shere" = shire; the construction is--don't think that _every_
bit of land (or county) can profit by following my directions, for
soils differ. Compare chapter 19, stanza 8, p. 48.
[E18] "Must keepe such coile;" must bustle about, exert themselves. Cf.
Scott's "Lord of the Isles," canto v. stanza 1: "For wake where'er he
may, man wakes to care and _coil_." And Shakspere: "I pray you watch
about Signor Leonata's door; for the wedding being there to-morrow,
there is a great _coil_ to-night."
[E19] In the edition of 1570 the first stanza of the "Preface to the
Buier" reads as follows:
"What lookest thou herein to haue?
Trim verses thy fansie to please?
Of Surry so famous that craue,
Looke nothing but rudenes in these."
The reference in the third line being to Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey,
author of the Translation of the second and fourth Books of the Æneid
of Virgil, and of numerous other poems, who was executed in 1547.
[E20] In the footnote to this Preface it is stated that the metre is
peculiar to Shenstone, but this is incorrect, as it is also used by
Prior: "Despairing beside a clear stream."
[E21] "The sea for my fish," _i.e._ for my fishpond.
[E22] With "The Ladder to Thrift" we may compare the following "Maxims
in _-ly_," from the Lansdowne MS. 762, f. 16_b_ (see Babees Book, ed.
Furnivall, p. 247):
"Aryse erly,
Serue God devowtely,
And the worlde besely,
Doo thy werk wisely,
Yeue thyne almes secretly,
Goo by the waye sadly,
Answer the people demuerly,
Goo to thy mete appetitely,
Sit therat discretely,
Of thy tunge be not to liberally,
Arise therfrom temperally,
Go to thy supper soberly,
And to thy bed merely,
Be in thyn Inne jocundely,
Please thy loue duely,
And slepe suerly."
[E23] "Familie," here used in the sense of the Latin original _familia_
= household, servants. Compare chap. 73, st. 13.
[E24] Compare Shakspere, Richard II. Act ii. sc. 4, 24: "And crossly to
the good all fortune goes."
[E25] "To bridle wild otes fantasie," _i.e._ to restrain the excesses
of youth.
[E26] "Well to account of which honest is not;" never think highly of
that which is not honourable, or honestly come by.
[E27] Cf. Hebrews xiii. 4: "Marriage is honourable in all, and the bed
undefiled." Tusser evidently does not appreciate "love in a cottage."
[E28] "Giue ouer to sudgerne, that thinkest to thee;" _i.e._ make up
your mind to settle down in one place and to give up roaming about, if
you hope to prosper, lest the grumbling of your hosts and the wants of
the nurses prove too expensive for you. Compare "The Dialogue of Wiving
and Thriving," ch. 67 stanza 3, p. 152.
[E29] Dr. Mavor suggests that the third line of this stanza should
read: "Of tone _or_ them both," "meaning, if we smell the savour of
saving or winning or them both."
[E30] A fool and his money are soon parted.
[E31] "Good bargaine a dooing," etc. When you have a chance of making
a good bargain, don't let every one know; but when you want to sell
anything, then let it be published abroad as widely as possible. In the
first case don't hesitate or haggle about it, but "take the ball on the
hop;" in the second, don't be in a hurry to take the first offer, if
you are not ashamed of what you wish to sell.
[E32] "Of the complaint of such poore tenants as paie _rent corne_
vnto their landlords, I speake not, who are often dealt withall very
hardlie. For beside that in the measuring of ten quarters, for the most
part they lose one through the iniquitie of the bushell (such is the
greedinesse of the appointed receiuers thereof), fault is found also
with the goodnesse and cleannesse of the graine. Wherby some peece of
monie must needs passe vnto their purses to stop their mouths withall,
or else my lord will not like of the corne: 'Thou are worthie to loose
thy lease, etc.' Or if it be cheaper in the market, than the rate
allowed for it is in their rents, then must they paie monie, and no
corne, which is no small extremitie."--Harrison, part i. p. 301.
[E33] "In this quatrain all the later editions of our author read
uniformly _misers_ for _michers_ (thieves or pilferers). What kind
of _misers_ 'unthriftiness' would make never seems to have been
considered. 'Careless and rash' is a gallicism for carelessness and
rashness."--M. "Mychare, _capax, cleps, furunculus._"--Prompt. Parv.
"_Mychers_, hedge crepers, fylloks and lushes,
That all the somer kepe dyches and bushes."
--The Hyeway to the Spytell House, ed. Atterson, ii. 11.
See also Townley Mysteries, pp. 216, 308. "_Caqueraffe_, a base
_micher_, scurvie hagler, lowsie dodger, etc. _Caqueduc_, a niggard,
_micher_, etc."--Cotgrave.
[E34] "Make hunger thy sauce." This is the proverb "hunger is the best
sauce," which is reckoned amongst the aphorisms of Socrates: "Optimum
cibi condimentum fames, sitis potus."--Cicero, De Finibus, Bk. II.
[E35] "Mastive, _Bandog, Molossus_."--Baret's Alvearie, 1580. "The
tie-dog or band-dog, so called bicause manie of them are tied up in
chaines and strong bonds, in the daie time, for dooing hurt abroad,
which is an huge dog, stubborne, ouglie, eager, burthenous of bodie
(and therefore but of little swiftnesse), terrible and fearfull to
behold, and oftentimes more fierce and fell than anie Archadian or
Corsican cur.... They take also their name of the word 'mase' and
'theefe' (or 'master theefe' if you will), bicause they often stound
and put such persons to their shifts in townes and villages, and are
the principall causes of their apprehension and taking."--Harrison,
Descrip. of England, part ii. pp. 44-5. "We han great _Bandogs_ will
teare their skins."--Spenser, Shep. Cal. September.
[E36] "The credite of maister," etc. If servants are allowed the credit
or trust, which should only be allowed to their master and mistress,
much trouble will be the result.
[E37] "Be to count ye wote what," that is, nothing to signify, of
little importance.
[E38] "So, twentie lode bushes," etc. So, without proper management,
twenty loads of bushes may be so wasted as only to serve for the
stopping of a single gap.
"A" = one, a single: a very common use in Early English; cf. William of
Nassington's "Myrrour of Lyfe," lines 2, 3;
"Fader and Sonne and Haly Gaste
That er _a_ God als we trowe maste"--that is, _one_ God.
[E39] Some, upon Sundays, have their tables covered with smoking
dishes, and then have to seek, _i.e._ do without dinners for the rest
of the week.
[E40] "Skarborow warning." Grose says it means, "A word and a blow
and the blow first." R. J. S. in Notes and Queries, 1st Ser. i. 170,
adds that it is a common proverb in Yorkshire. Fuller states that the
saying arose from "Thomas Stafford, who in the reign of Mary, A.D.
1557, with a small company, seized on Scarborough Castle, and before
the townspeople had the least notice of their approach." Another
explanation is that, if ships passed the castle without saluting
it, a shotted gun was fired at them. In a ballad by Heywood another
derivation is given:
"This term _Scarborow warning_ grew (some say)
By hasty hanging for rank robbery theare.
Who that was met, but suspect in that way,
Strait he was trust up, whatever he were."
This implies that Scarborough imitated the Halifax gibbet law.--N.&
Q. 1st Ser. i. 138. In a letter by Toby Matthew, Bishop of Durham, to
the Archbishop of York, Jan. 19, 1603, he writes: "When I was in the
midst of this discourse I received a message from my Lord Chamberlain
that it was his Majesty's pleasure that I should preach before him
on Sunday next, which _Scarborough warning_ did not only perplex me,
but so puzzel me as no mervail if somewhat be prætermitted, which
otherwise I might have better remembered."--N. & Q. 4th Ser. xii. 408.
"_Scarborough warning_. The antiquity of the phrase is shown by its
occurrence in Puttenham's 'Arte of English Poetrie,' ed. 1589. The
following is the passage, from p. 199 of Arber's reprint: [We have]
'many such prouerbiall speeches: as, _Totnesse is turned French_, for
a strange alteration: _Skarborow warning_, for a sodaine commandement,
allowing no respect or delay to bethinke a man of his busines.'"--Note
by Rev. W. Skeat. See also Ray's Proverbs.
[E41] "Sir I arest yee;" that is, the Sheriff's officer, who, touching
your arm, would use these words.
[E42] "Legem pone," a curious old proverbial or cant term for _ready
money_.
"There are so manie Danaes now a dayes,
That love for lucre, paine for gaine is sold;
No true affection can their fancie please,
Except it be a Iove, to raine downe gold
Into their laps, which they wyde open hold;
If _legem pone_ comes, he is receav'd,
When _vix haud habes_ is of hope bereav'd."
--The Affectionate Shepheard, 1594.
"But in this there is nothing to bee abated, all their speech is _legem
pone_, or else with their ill custome they will detaine thee."--G.
Minshul, Essays in Prison.
[E43] "_Oremus_," from Lat. _orare_ = to beg, here means making excuses
for non-payment of debts.
[E44] "_Præsta quæsumus_" = lend me, I pray. Compare _Preste_ = a loan,
_Pretoes_ = loans, in Halliwell. A lender hates to hear a man say
_Præsta_.
[E45] The word "collects" is used here in its original meaning of short
prayers; thus the prayers before the Epistle and Gospel in the Prayer
Book are called Collects, as containing briefly the lessons of the
Epistle and Gospel.
[E46] "Nor put to thy hand," etc.; that is, do not meddle in the
business of other people, and be careful whom you assist, lest by being
too free and generous you yourself may be put to inconvenience. Ray
gives: "Put not thy hand between the bark and the tree," that is, do
not meddle in family affairs.
[E47] Tusser here, while acknowledging the necessity and advantages of
the practice of "giving credit" in business, impresses strongly upon
his readers the dishonesty and danger of promiscuous borrowing and
lending, either to relations or friends, winding up with the advice
never to trust a man who has once broken his engagements, without a
surety, and never to lend a second time to a man who is angry with you
for asking for payment of what he already owes.
[E48] "The foole at the bottom, the wise at the brim;" referring to
the proverb, "Better spare at brim than at bottom," that is, "Better
be frugal in youth, than be reduced to the necessity of being saving
in age." Ray also gives another proverb of a similar character,
"'Tis too late to spare when the bottom is dry." "Sera in fundo
parsimonia."--Seneca, Epist. i.
[E49] "Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum." Cf. Barbour's Bruce,
ed. Skeat, p. 612.
[E50] "Stands thee vpon." Compare Shakspere, King Richard II. Act ii.
sc. 3, 138: "_It stands_ your grace _upon_ to do him right;" and,
"_It stands_ me much _upon_,
To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me."
--Richard III. Act iv. sc. 2, 59.
[E51] "Jankin and Jenikin" are only names for servants in general.
[E52]
"The proverb says, and who'd a proverb cross?
That stones, when rolling, gather little moss."
--Vade Mecum for Malt Worms, 1720, p. 6 (part 2).
See also Ray's Proverbs. Cf.
"On the stone that styll doth turne about,
There groweth no mosse."
--Sir T. Wiat, "How to use the Court," l. 4.
A similar proverb occurs in Piers Plowman, A Text, Passus x. l. 101:
"Selden moseth the marbelston that men ofte treden." Cf. also, "Syldon
mossyth the stone þat oftyn ys tornyd and wende."--"How the good wife
taught her daughter," pr. in Q. Elizabeth's Achademy, ed. Furnivall,
p. 39. In the Verses on Lord Burghley's Crest (printed in Thynne's
Animaduersions, Chaucer Soc. ed. Furnivall), stanza 32, we read:
"And prouerbe olde was not deuis'd in veyne,
That 'roolinge stone doth neuer gather mosse';
Who lightly leaves in myddest of all his peine,
His former labor frustrates with his losse;
But who continues as he did begynne,
Withe equall course the pointed goale doth wynne."
See also chapt. 77. st. 20, p. 170.
[E53] "Of all [the lawyers] that euer I knew in Essex, Denis and
Mainford excelled, till John of Ludlow, alias Mason, came in place,
vnto whome in comparison they two were but children: for this last
in lesse than three or foure yeares, did bring one man (among manie
else-where in other places) almost to extreame miserie (if beggerie
be the vttermost) that before he had the shauing of his beard, was
valued at two hundred pounds (I speake with the least) and finallie
feeling that he had not sufficient wherwith to susteine himselfe and
his familie, and also to satisfie that greedie rauenour, which still
called vpon him for new fees, he went to bed, and within foure daies
made an end of his wofull life, euen with care and pensiuenesse. After
his death also he so handled his sonne, that there was neuer sheepe
shorne in Maie, so neere clipped of his fleece present, as he was of
manie to come: so that he was compelled to let awaie his land, bicause
his cattell and stocke were consumed, and he no longer able to occupie
the ground."--Harrison, Descript. of Eng. part i. pp. 206-7.
"Daw" = a chattering fool. See Peacock's Glossary (Eng. Dial. Soc.).
[E54] From this stanza it would seem that sportsmen did not hesitate
to trespass on the lands of others in former days any more than at
present, but in such cases Tusser recommends the "mild answer which
turneth away wrath," and sets out the advantages of courteousness and
respect to one's superiors.
[E55] "That flesh might be more plentifull and better cheaper,
two daies in the weeke, that is Fryday and Saturday, are specially
appointed to fish, and now of late yeares, by the prouidence of our
prudent Princesse, Elizabeth, the Wednesday also is in a manner
restrained to the same order, not for any religion or holinesse
supposed to be in the eating of fish rather than of flesh, but onely
for the ciuill policie as I haue said. That as God hath created both
for man's use, so both being used or refrained at certaine seasons,
might by that entercourse be more abundant. And no doubt, if all daies
appointed for that purpose were duly obserued, but that flesh and fish
both would be much more plentifull, and beare lesse price than they
doe. For accounting the Lent season, and all fasting daies in the yeare
together with Wednesday and Friday and Saturday, you shall see that the
one halfe of the yeare is ordeined to eate fish in."--Cogan's Haven of
Health, ed. 1612, p. 138.
"It is lawfull for euerie man to feed vpon what soeuer he is able
to purchase, except it be vpon those daies whereon eating of flesh
is especiallie forbidden by the lawes of the realme, which order is
taken onelie to the end our numbers of cattell may be the better
increased, and that aboundance of fish which the sea yeeldeth, more
generallie receiued. Beside this, there is great consideration had in
making of this law for the preseruation of the nauie, and maintenance
of conuenient numbers of sea faring men, both which would otherwise
greatlie decaie, if some meanes were not found whereby they might be
increased."--Harrison, Descript. of Eng. part i. p. 144.
The following menu for a fish day is given in the Liber Cure Cocorum,
p. 54, ed. Morris:
"For a servise on fysshe day.
"Fyrst white pese and porray þou take,
Cover þy white heryng for goddys sake;
Þen cover red heryng, and set abufe,
And mustard on heghe, for goddys lufe;
Þen cover salt salmon on hast,
Salt ele þer wyth on þis course last.
For þe secunde course, so god me glad,
Take ryse and fletande fignade,
Þan salt fysshe and stok fysshe take þou schalle,
For last of þis course, so fayre me falle.
For þe iii cours sowpys done fyne,
And also lamprouns in galentyne,
Bakun turbut and sawmon ibake
Alle fresshe, and smalle fysshe þou take
Þerwith, als troute, sperlynges, and menwus with al,
And loches to horn sawce versance shal."
See also the Babees Book, ed. Furnivall, p. 50.
[E56] "Setteth his soule vpon sixe or on seauen," that is, risks his
life on the cast of a die.
[E57] "Sit downe Robin and rest thee." I was inclined to think that
this was the burden of some ballad, but Mr. Chappell, to whom I
applied, is of opinion that it was not.
"An habitation inforced," etc., _i.e._ it is better to settle down,
even late in life, than not at all. Comp. chap. 10, stanza 8, p. 19.
[E58] For a great portion of the year the only animal food eaten was
in a salted state. In the autumn as much meat was cured as would last
the winter; and until the pastures had been for some time abundant,
that is, not until Midsummer, there were no means of fattening cattle.
After the winter months, veal and bacon were welcomed as the precursors
of fresh beef; and those who lived near the sea-coast enjoyed the
addition of fresh fish; but the state of the roads prevented the inland
parts of the country partaking of this benefit. The consumption of fish
during Lent and on other fast-days, comprising a great part of the
year, being expressly directed by statute, the people, even after the
abolition of the old religion, provided themselves at several large
fairs held almost expressly for the sale and distribution of salt-fish.
[E59] "Veale and Bakon is the man," _i.e._ is the proper food, or is in
season.
[E60] "Martilmas beef," beef killed at Martinmas, and dried for
winter use. "Biefe salted, dried up in the chimney, Martlemas
biefe."--Hollyband's Dict. 1593. See note to l. 383 of Wallace, in
Specimens of Eng. Literature, ed. Skeat, p. 391.
"Beefe is a good meate for an Englysshe man, so be it the beest be
yonge, and that it be not kowe-flesshe; for olde beefe and kowe-flesshe
doth ingender melancolye and leporouse humoures. Yf it be moderatly
powderyd, that the groose blode by salte may be exhaustyd, it doth make
an Englysshe man stronge, the education of hym with it consyderyd.
Martylmas beef, whiche is called 'hanged beef' in the rofe of the
smoky howse, is not laudable; it maye fyll the bely, and cause a man
to drynke, but it is euyll for the stone, and euyll of dygestyon, and
maketh no good iuce. If a man haue a peace hangynge by his syde, and
another in his bely, that the whiche doth hange by the syde shall do
hym more good, yf a showre of rayne do chaunse, than that the which is
in his bely, the appetyde of mans sensualyte notwithstandynge."--Andrew
Boorde's Dyetary, E. E. Text Soc. edit. F. J. Furnivall, chap. xvi.
"In a hole in the same Rock was three Barrels of nappy liquour; thither
the Keeper brought a good Red-Deere Pye, cold Roast Mutton, and an
excellent shooing-horn of hang'd _Martimas_ Biefe."--1639, John Taylor,
Part of this Summers Travels, p. 26.
"_Bacon_ is good for carters, and plowe men, the which be euer
labouryng in the earth or dunge; but and yf they haue the stone and vse
to eate it, they shall synge 'wo be to the pye!' Wherefore I do say
that coloppes and egges is as holsome for them as a talowe candell is
good for a horse mouth, or a peece of powdred Beefe is good for a blere
eyed mare."--A. Boorde, Regyment, fo. K iii. b.
"As for _bacon_ it is in no wise commended as wholsome, especially for
students, or such as haue feeble stomacks. But for labouring men it is
conuenient according to that Latine prouerbe, grosse meate for grosse
men."--Cogan's Haven of Health, p. 116.
[E61] The farmers in old times were greater economists than now. "Old
crones and such old things," it seems, fell commonly to their own
share, while the best meat was probably sold.--M. Compare also 21. 1.
[E62] "All Saints doe laie," etc. All Saints' Day expects or lays
itself out for pork and souse, sprats and smelts for the household.
"When it [the bore] is killed, scalded, and cut out, of his former
parts is our brawne made, the rest is nothing so fat, and therefore
it beareth the name of sowse onelie, and is commonly reserved for the
serving-man and hind, except it please the owner to have anie part
ther of baked, which are then handed of custome after this manner.
The hinder parts being cut off, they are first drawne with lard, and
then sodden; being sodden, they are sowsed in claret wine and vineger
a certeine space and afterward baked in pasties, and eaten of manie
in steed of the wild bore, and trulie it is very good meat. The
pestles [legs] may be hanged up a while to drie before they be drawne
with lard if you will, and thereby prove the better."--Harrison,
Descrip. of Eng. part ii. p. 11.
"_Spurlings_ are but broad _Sprats_, taken chiefly on our Northern
coast; which being drest and pickled as Anchovaes be in Provence,
rather surpass them than come behind them in taste and goodness.... As
for Red Sprats and _Spurlings_, I vouchsafe them not the name of any
wholesome nourishment, or rather of no nourishment at all; commending
them for nothing, but that they are bawdes to enforce appetite and
serve well the poor man's turn to quench hunger."--Muffett, p. 169,
quoted in The Babees Book, ed. Furnivall. "Smelt = Spirling or Sparling
in Scotland, Salmo Sperlanus."--Yarrell, Names of British Fishes. "A
Sperlynge, _ipimera, sperlingus_."--Catholicon Anglicum. See also
Glossary to Specimens of Early Eng., ed. Morris and Skeat.
[E63] "Embrings." Ember days or weeks, set apart for consecrating to
God the four seasons of the year, and for imploring his blessing by
fasting and prayer. They were settled by the Council of Placentia
A.D. 1095.--M. _Embring_ is a more correct form, being nearer to A.S.
_ymbren_. A connexion with Ger. _quatember_ is out of the question.
[E64] See as to the law relating to fasting and fish days, note E55 on
10. 51.
[E65] "Leaue anker in mud," _i.e._ drift, and break away from their
anchorage.
[E66] "It is an ill winde turnes none to good," _i.e._ turns to good
for none.
"An yll wynd that blowth no man good,
The blower of whych blast is she;
The lyther lustes bred of her broode
Can no way brede good propertye."
--Song against Idleness, by John Heywood, _circa_ 1540.
"Ah! Sirra! it is an old proverb and a true
I sware by the roode!
It is an il wind that bloues no man to good."
--Marriage of Wit and Wisdom, 1570.
Quoted in Hazlitt's Handbook of Proverbs, p. 240.
[E67] "If great she appereth," _i.e._ if seen through a dense
atmosphere, which causes her to appear much larger, it is an indication
of approaching rain. The reverse is the case when the atmosphere is
rare, and the orb of the moon appears small.
[E68] "Tyde flowing is feared," etc. "The Spaniards think that all
who die of chronic diseases breathe their last during the ebb."--The
Doctor, p. 207. Compare also in David Copperfield, "Mr. Barkis going
out with the tide." Tusser, however, seems to mean that it was the flow
and not the ebb which was dangerous to sick persons.
[E69]
"He that fast spendeth must need borrow,
But when he must pay again, then is all the sorrow."
--MS. of 15th cent. in Rel. Antiqua, vol. i. p. 316.
[E70] September is the month when the annual labours of agriculture
begin their round, and it is therefore, justly, put first in the
Calendar of farming. Some, indeed, take their bargains from Lady-day;
but this is by no means so convenient as Michaelmas.--M.
[E71] The off-going tenant of champion or open field, as is still
customary, allows the in-coming tenant to summer fallow that portion of
the ground which is destined for wheat. But the occupier of woodland
or inclosures holds the whole till the expiration of his term, unless
certain stipulations are made by lease; and without a lease, neither
the real interest of the tenant nor the landowner can be consulted.--M.
[E72] "Buieng or selling of pig in a poke," i.e. making a blind bargain.
"A good cochnay coke,
Though ye loue not to bye the pyg in the poke,
Yet snatche ye at the poke, that the pyg is in,
Not for the poke, but the pyg good chepe to wyn."
--Heywood's Dialogue (1546), ed. 1562, part ii. cap. 9.
See also Hazlitt's Handbook of English Proverbs, p. 413.
[E73] A _gofe_ is a _mow_ (rick); and the _gofe_-ladder is for the
thresher to ascend and descend, in order to throw down the sheaves with
the assistance of the _short pitch-fork_, while the _long_ was probably
for pitching the straw. The _straw-fork_ and _rake_ were to turn the
straw from off the threshed corn, and the _fan_ and _wing_ to clean
it. A _cartnave_ might be required to stand on in this operation. A
_casting shovel_, such as maltmen use, enables the farmer to select the
best and heaviest grain for seed, as they always fly farthest if thrown
with equal force.--M.
[E74] A _skep_ is a small basket or wooden vessel with a handle, to
fetch corn in and for other purposes.--M.
[E75] "_Aperne_ is an old provincial pronunciation, adopted from
a still older _napern_ or _nappern_; and Halliwell observes, that
_nappern_ is still the pronunciation in the North of England. This word
is interesting as illustrating two points: (1) the shifting of _r_,
so that the various pronunciations of _apern_ and _apron_ correspond
to the variations _brid_ for _bird_, and _burd_ for _bride_; and (2)
the loss of the initial _n_; for _apron_ is for Fr. _naperon_, a large
napkin; see Roquefort and Wedgwood. _Naperon_, without _n_ and _e_, is
_apron_; without _n_ and _o_, it is _apern_."--Rev. Walter W. Skeat in
N. & Q. 1869.
[E76] "To make whyte lethyre. Take halfe an unce of whyte coperose
and di. ȝ. of alome, and salle-peter the mowntance of the yolke of an
egge, and yf thou wolle have thy skynne thykke, take of whetmele ij
handfulle, and that is sufficient for a galone of water; and if thou
wolle have thy skynne rynnyng, take of ry mele ij handfulle, and grynd
alle thyes saltes smale, and caste hem into lewke warme water, and
let heme melt togedyre, and so alle in ewene warme water put therein
thy skynne. And if hit be a velome skynne, lett hit be thereinne ix
days and ix nyȝtes ... and if hit be a parchement skyne, let hit ly
thereinne iv days and iv nyȝtes; ... thanne take coperose of the
whyttest the quantité of ij benys for j skynne and the yolke of j egge,
and breke hit into a dysse, and than put water over the fyre, and put
thereinne thy coperas, and than put thy yolke in thy skyne, and rub hit
alle abowte, and thanne ley thy skynne in the seyde water, and let hit
ly, ut dictum est."--From the Porkington MS. 15th cent.
[E77] A Pannel and Ped have this difference, the one is much shorter
than the other, and raised before and behind, and serves for small
burdens; the other is longer and made for Burdens of Corn. These are
fastened with a leathern Girt, called a Wantye.--T.R. Miss Mitford,
in her "Recollections," writes that her father, who used to ride a
favourite gentle blood-mare, had a _pad_ constructed, perched and
strapped upon which, and encircled by his arm, she used to accompany
him.
[E78] A cart or wagon whose wheels are hooped and clouted with iron is
called in Lincoln a _shod-cart_ or _shod-wain_. In the Paston Letters,
ed. Gairdner, vol. ii. p. 245, we have "_clot shon_" = boots tipped
with iron. "Clowte of a shoo, _pictasium_."--Prompt. Parv. Cf. Milton,
Comus, l. 634:
"The dull swain
Treads on it daily with his clouted shoon."
In Lancashire a "Clout-nail" is a large nail used for fixing iron
_clouts_ on the wooden axle-trees of carts.
[E79] "Ten sacks," each holding a coome or four bushels, are only
sufficient for a single load of wheat; but farms were not so large, nor
the produce so great when Tusser wrote.
[E80] A _pulling hook_ is a barbed iron for drawing firing from the
wood stack.--M.
[E81] "A nads" = an adze, an instance (like a nall = an awl, above) of
the _n_ of the article being joined to the following vowel. Similarly
we have "atte nale" = at the ale-house, a corruption of A.S. æt þan
ale.--See Piers Plowman, ed. Skeat, B. Text, Prologue, l. 43. So in
Sir Thomas More's Workes, 1557, p. 709, we have "A verye nodypoll
_nydyote_" for _idiot_. Other instances of the prefixed _n_ are "nonce,
a nother, nagares (= augers)." Cf. "One axe, a bill, iiij _nagares_, ij
hatchettes, an ades," etc.--Shakspereana Genealogica, 1869, p. 472.
[E82] "A Douercourt beetle" is explained by Dr. Mavor as "one that is
large (like the rood of Dover once so celebrated) and capable of making
a great noise," and he adds that "there is an old proverb 'A Dover
Court: all speakers and no hearers.'" But this explanation is entirely
erroneous: there is no reference whatever to _Dover_, but, as the
following extract will show, a Dovercourt beetle simply means one made
of the wood of the elms of Dovercourt in Essex, which were celebrated
for their soundness and lasting qualities: "Of all the elms that euer I
saw, those in the south side of _Douer court_, in Essex neere Harwich,
are the most notable, for they growe, I meane, in crooked maner, that
they are almost apt for nothing else but nauie timber, great ordinance,
and _beetels_; and such thereto is their naturall qualitie, that being
vsed in the said behalfe, they continue longer, and more long than
anie the like trees in whatsoeuer parcell else of this land, without
cuphar [cracking], shaking or cleauing, as I find."--Harrison, Descr.
of Eng. part i. p. 341.
[E83] In the Hist. of Hawsted, Suffolk, by Sir J. Cullum, 2nd ed. p.
216, we are told that there, in the 14th century, oxen were as much
used as horses; and, in ploughing heavy land, would go forward where
horses would stop. "A horse kept for labour ought to have every night
the 6th part of a bushel of oats; for an ox, 3½ measures of oats, 10 of
which make a bushel, are sufficient for a week."
[E84] "The ploughstaff is alluded to by Strutt (Manners and Customs,
ii. 12): 'The ploughman yoketh oxen to the plough, and he holdeth the
plough-stilt [_i.e._ principal hale or handle] in his left hand, and
in his right hand the _ploughstaff_ to break the clods.' See plate 32
(vol. i.) in Strutt, and the picture of a plough at work prefixed to
Mr. Wright's edition of Piers the Plowman, copied from MS. T. [MS. R.
3. 14, Trin. Coll. Camb.]."--Piers Plowman, ed. Skeat, B. vi. 105.
[E85] "Moether" [and "mother", 16. 14.]. This word is derived by Sir
H. Spelman from Danish _moer_ = an unmarried girl. "_Puera_, a woman
chylde, callyd in Cambrydgeshyre a _modder_." "_Pupa_, a yonge wenche,
a gyrle, a _modder_."--Elyot's Lat. Dict. 1538. "_Fille_, a maid,
girle, _modder_, lasse."--Cotgrave. Ben Jonson uses the word in his
"Alchymist": "Away, you talk like a foolish _mauther_."--Act iv. sc. 7.
Richard Brome also has it in the Eng. Moor, Act iii. sc. i.:
_P._ "I am a _mother_, that do want a service.
_Qu._ O, thou'rt a Norfolk woman (cry thee mercy,)
Where maids are _mothers_, and _mothers_ are maids."
"I have been informed by an intelligent friend, who is a native of
Norfolk, that on a certain trial in that county, it was asked who was
the evidence of what had been stated. The answer was, 'A _mather_
playing on a planchard.' The Judge was nonplussed, till the meaning was
explained, namely, 'A girl playing on the floor.'"--M.
[E86] "Hoigh de la roy," that is, excellent or proper; but why, I
cannot say.
[E87] A _cradle_ is a three-forked instrument of wood, on which the
corn is caught as it falls from the scythe, and thus is laid in regular
order. It is heavy to work with; but is extremely useful for cutting
barley or oats, which are intended to be put into sheaves.--M.
[E88] Tar was the common salve for all sores in cattle. "Two pounds of
tar to a pound of pitch," is a good composition for sheep marks.--M.
"Every shepherd used to carry a _tar-box_, called a _tarre-boyste_ in
the Chester Plays, p. 121, or a _terre-powghe_ (= tar pouch) in P.
Pl. Crede, l. 618. It held a salve containing tar which was used for
anointing sores in sheep. Compare
"Heare is tarre in a potte
To heale from the rotte."
--Chester Plays, p. 120.
See also History of Agriculture and Prices in England, by J. E. Thorold
Rogers, vol. i. p. 31. Note to P. Plowman, ed. Skeat, C. x. 262-264.
[E89] "Sealed and true," _i.e._ certified and stamped as correct. In
Liber Albus, ed. Riley, p. 233, we read: "No brewster or taverner shall
sell from henceforth by any measure but the gallon, pottle, and quart;
and that these shall be _sealed_ with the seal of the Alderman," etc.
See also the Statute of Sealed Measures, _id._ p. 290.
[E90] _Striking_ is the last ploughing before the seed is committed to
the ground; previously to which the ridges are to be harrowed.
[E91] "Sowe barlie and dredge." In the 13th century the grain crops
chiefly cultivated in England were wheat, "berecorn," _dragg_, or a
mixture of vetches and oats, beans and pease. The regulations for
the brewers of Paris in 1254 prescribe that they shall brew only "de
grains, c'est à savoir d'orge de mestuel, et de _dragèe_." "_Dredge_
mault, malt made of oats, mixed with barley malt, of which they make
an excellent quick sort of drink."--Bp. Kennett's Gloss. "A mixture of
oates and barley; and at present used very seldom in malting."--T.R.
"_Dragée_ aux chevaux, provender of divers sorts of pulse mixed
together."--Cotgrave. From Way's Notes in Prompt. Parv. s. v. Dragge.
[E92] Forby (Vocab. 1830) says: "Crow-keeper, a boy employed to scare
crows from new sown land. Lear, in his madness, says: 'That fellow
handles his bow like a crow-keeper.' Besides lustily whooping, he
carries an old gun, from which he cracks a little powder, and sometimes
puts in a few stones, but seldom hits, and still seldomer kills a
crow." Cf. Romeo and Juliet, Act i. sc. 4: "Scaring the ladies like a
crow-keeper."
[E93] A Marsh Wall is a Sea bank, made with considerable slope to
sea-ward, which is called a Break or Breck; it is faced with Turf which
sometimes is worn by the sea, or Holes made in it by Crabs, etc. The
Foreland is a piece of Land that lies from the foot of the Bank to
Sea-ward, and must be well look'd after, that it wear not away or come
too near the Bank (as the Workmen term it).--T.R.
[E94] A brawner should be kept cool and hard, which encreaseth his
shield, as the skin of the shoulder is called.--M.
[E95] Measles in hogs are small round globules or pustules that lie
along the muscles; and are occasioned by uncleanness and want of
water.--M.
[E96] The retting of hemp, as it is called, should be done with care.
It should be taken out of the water as soon as it begins to swim. The
smell left by hemp and flax is extremely unpleasant, as travellers in
the flax districts of the North of Ireland well know.
[E97] "In time of plenty of mast, our red and fallow deere will not
let to participat thereof with our hogs, more than our nete: yea, our
common pultrie also, if they may come vnto them. But as this abundance
dooth prooue verie pernicious vnto the first, so the egs which these
latter doo bring foorth (beside blackenesse in color and bitternesse of
tast,) haue not seldome beene found to breed diuerse diseases vnto such
persons as haue eaten of the same."--Harrison, Descrip. of Eng. part i.
p. 339.
[E98] If your dog sets chaunting (crying) these lawless hogs, haunting
(or frequenting) your fields so often, he does you a benefit.
[E99] _Shaken_ timber is such as is full of clefts and cracks.
_Bestowe_ and _stick_ it, is to lay the boards neatly on each other,
with sticks between, to admit the air.
[E100] The _hook and line_ is a cord with a hook at its end to bind up
anything with, and carry it away.--M.
[E101] "Flaies," probably a misprint in the edition of 1580 for
_flails_, which is the reading of the other editions.
[E102] Cotgrave has: "Hastiveau, a _hasting_ apple or peare;" and
"Hastivel, as Hastiveau; or a soon-ripe apple, called the St. John's
apple." Lacroix (Manners, Customs, etc., during the Middle Ages, p.
116) mentions "hastiveau, an early sort of pear."
[E103] "Vergis and perie." "Verjuice is well known to be the juice
of Crabs, but it is not so much taken notice of, that for strength
and flavour it comes little short if not exceeds lime-juice."--T.R.
"Verjuice, or green juice, which, with vinegar, formed the essential
basis of sauces, and is now extracted from a species of green grape,
which never ripens, was originally the juice of sorrel; another sort
was extracted by pounding the green blades of wheat."--Lacroix,
Manners, Customs and Dress, during the Middle Ages, p. 167.
[E104] Make up your hedges with brambles and holly. "Set no bar" = put
no limit, do not leave off planting quicksets while the months have an
R in their names. See chap. 35, stanza 6, p. 77, and note E112, for 19.
33.
[E105] Laying up here signifies the first plowing, for Barley it is
often plow'd, so as that a Ridge-balk in the middle is covered by two
opposite furrows.--T.R.
[E106] By Fallow is understood a Winter-fallow, or bringing Ground to a
Barley Season.--T.R.
[E107] "Brantham" parish, in Essex, in which Cattiwade is situated,
and the place where Tusser first commenced farming. The average yield
of corn in his time was, on each acre well tilled and dressed, twenty
bushels of wheat, thirty-two of barley, and forty of oats and pulse.
[E108] Wheat does not thrive well either on very poor or very rich
land. If the land is _peeled_ or poor, the grain is _burnt_ or
_steelie_, and if _proud_ (too heavily manured), the grain is apt to
run to straw.
[E109] "There grows in several parts of Africa, Asia, and America, a
kind of corn called Mays, and such as we commonly name _Turkey wheat_.
They make bread of it, which is hard of digestion, heavy in the
stomach, and does not agree with any but such as are of a robust and
hail constitution."--A Treatise on Foods, by Mons. L. Lemery, London,
1704, p. 71.
[E110] _Breadcorne_ and _drinkcorn_ mean wheat and barley, the first
being used for the making of bread, the second for malting purposes.
Mr. Peacock, in his Glossary of Manley, etc., has: "_Breadcorn_, corn
to be ground into _breadmeal_ (_i.e._ flour with only a portion of the
bran taken out, from which brown bread is made); not to be used for
finer purposes. It is a common custom of farmers, when they engage a
bailiff, to give him a certain sum of money per annum, and to allow
him also his _breadcorn_ at 40_s._ per quarter." Cf. Piers Plowman, C.
Text, Passus ix. 61: "A boussel of _bredcorne_."
[E111] Hazlitt gives as a proverb: "To play the devil in the bulmong."
An acre of bullimong land was worth 33_s._ 4_d._; see note E370.
[E112] According to Norden (Surveyor's Dialogue, 1607, p. 239) the
best mode of making a quickset hedge is as follows: "The plants of
whitethorne, mixed here and there with oke and ash"; if the plants
are not easily procured, then "the berries of the white or hawthorne,
acornes, ash keyes mixed together, and these wrought or wound up in a
rope of straw, wil serve, but they will be somewhat longer in growing.
Make a trench at the top or in the edge of the ditch, and lay into it
some fat soyle, and then lay the rope all along the ditch, and cover
it with good soile also, then cover it with the earth, and ever as any
weedes or grasse begins to grow, pull it off and keepe it as cleane as
may be from all hindrances, and when the seeds begin to come, keepe
cattle from bruising them, and after some two or three yeares, cut the
yong spring by the earth, and so will they branch and grow thick, and
if occasion serve, cut them so again alwayes, preserving the oake and
ashe to become trees." The best time to lay the berries in this manner
is "in _September_ or _October_, if the berries be fully ripe."
[E113] A "porkling" was worth 28_d._ at the time. See note E370.
[E114] With reference to the "daintiness" of the Flemings, many of whom
were settled on the East coast, compare the following:
"Now bere and _bacon_ bene fro Pruse ibrought
Into Flaundres, as loved and fere isoughte;
Osmonde [a kind of iron], coppre, bowstaffes, stile [steel], and wex,
Peltre-ware [hides], and grey, pych, terre, borde, and flex,
And Coleyne threde, fustiane, and canvase,
Corde, bokeram; of olde tyme thus it wase.
But the _Flemmyngis_, amonge these thinges dere,
In comen lowen [love] beste _bacon_ and bere.
Thus arre they hogges; and drynkyn wele ataunt [so much];
Farewel, Flemynge! hay, harys, hay, avaunt!"
--Wright's Political Songs, ii. 171.
[E115] _Light fire_, as it is termed, is still used in Norfolk.--M.
[E116] "Bowd eaten malt." "The more it be dried (yet must it be doone
with soft fire) the sweeter and better the malt is, and the longer it
will continue, whereas if it be not dried downe (as they call it), but
slackelie handled, it will breed a kind of worme, called a _wiuell_,
which groweth in the floure of the corne, and in processe of time will
so eat out it selfe, that nothing shall remaine of the graine but euen
the verie rind or huske."--Harrison, Description of England, part i.
pp. 156-7. R. Holme says that "the Wievell eateth and devoureth corn
in the garners; they are of some people called _bowds_."--Acad. of
Arm. Bk. ii. p. 467. "Bruk is a maner of flye, short and brodissh,
and in a sad husc, blak hed, in shap mykel toward a golde _bowde_,
and mykhede [size] of twyis and þryis atte moste of a gold _bowde_, a
chouere, oþer vulgal can y non þerfore."--Arundel MS. 42, f. 64. The
name _gold bowde_ probably denotes a species of _Chrysomela_, Linn.
Way, in Prompt. Parv.
[E117] See note E5 on "A Medicine for the Cowlaske." Sloes gently
baked in an oven are best preserved. They are an excellent and cheap
remedy for laxity of the bowels, in men or cattle, if judiciously
used.--M.
[E118] Dr. Mavor suggests that as Tusser is pretty correct in his
rhymes, he probably wrote _beasty_ originally. In Pegge's Forme of
Cury, 1780, p. 111, are given two recipes for the prevention of
_Restyng_ in Venisoun.
[E119] "Stouer." _Stover_ is the term now applied to the coarser hay
made of clover and artificial grasses, which is kept for the winter
feed of cattle. But in Shakespeare's time the artificial grasses were
not known in England, and were not introduced till about the middle of
the seventeenth century. In Cambridgeshire I am informed that hay made
in this manner is not called "stover" till the seeds have been threshed
out. In the sixteenth century the word was apparently used to denote
any kind of winter fodder except grass hay. Compare
"Thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep,
And flat meads thatch'd with _stover_, them to keep."
--Shakspere, Tempest, Act iv. sc. I;
and Drayton, Polyolbion, xxv. 145,
"And others from their Carres, are busily about,
To draw out Sedge and Reed, for Thatch and _Stover_ fit."
"Stover" is enumerated by Ray among the South-and East-Country words as
used in Essex, and is to be found in Moor's Suffolk Words and Forby's
Vocabulary of East Anglia.
[E120] See note E61.
[E121] In cleaning corn for _seed, casting_ or throwing it with a
_casting shovel_ (see 17. 1) from one heap to another, in order to
select the heaviest grains, which will always go farthest, is an
excellent practice: but in _malting_, this is not necessary, as the
light grains and seeds of weeds may be skimmed off in the cistern.--M.
[E122] Wheat is well known to work better in grinding and baking after
it has undergone a natural heat in the rick or mow. Wheat that is
threshed early keeps with difficulty.--M.
[E123] "Rauening curres" seem to have been as great a nuisance in
Tusser's time as at present, in spite of what Dr. Mavor terms one of
the "few patriotic taxes which we have to boast of."
[E124] St. Edmund's Day (20th November) may probably be the proper time
for planting garlic and beans; but why the moon should be "in the wane"
we are not informed, though, according to Tusser, "thereon hangeth a
thing." The moon was formerly supposed to extend her power over all
nature, and not over the tides and weather only.
[E125] The farmer who "looks to thrive" must "have an eye," not only
to his barn, but also to the cruel habits or tricks of his servants;
otherwise he may find his cattle maimed or otherwise injured, and his
poultry made "to plaie tapple vp taile," a cant expression, meaning
to tumble head over heels. Cf. the Scotch phrase, "coup your creels."
Cotgrave, _s.v. Laisser_ and _Houseau_, has an exactly parallel
expression: "_Il a laissé ses houseaux_, he hath tipped up the heeles,
or is ready to doe it; he hath got him to his last bed; he is even as
good as gone; he is no better then a dead man." The Catholicon Anglicum
also gives "Top ouer tayle, _precipitanter_: to cast tope ouer tayle,
_precipitari_."
[E126] The leathern bottle, from its size, must have been a most
convenient vehicle for the removal of corn and other stolen property.
[E127] Our author does not appear to have had any idea of the use of
soot as a top-dressing to land, but its value is now well understood,
as one of the greatest improvers of cold, mossy grasslands.
[E128] It is leanness and ill-dressing that occasion nits and lice, not
the state of the weather when they are taken to house.
[E129] The rack ought to be accessible on all sides, and perhaps high
enough for small cattle to escape under it from their more powerful
adversaries.--M.
[E130] "_Barth_." Wedgwood includes this under _berth_, the seaman's
term for snug anchorage for themselves or their vessels. See Glossary.
[E131] "A _fires-bird_, for that she sat continually by the fire
side."--Tom Tell-Trothe's New Yeare's Gift, New Shakspere Soc. ed.
Furnivall, p. 12.
[E132] "Beath." Bathing at the Fire, as it is commonly called, when the
wood is yet unseasoned, sets it to what purpose you think fit.--T.R.
[E133] "Camping." "Goals were pitched 150 or 200 yards apart, formed
of the thrown-off clothes of the competitors." Each party had two
goals 10 or 15 yards apart. The parties, 10 to 15 aside, stand in line
facing their own goals and each other, at 10 yards distance, midway
between the goals and nearest that of their adversaries. An indifferent
spectator throws up the ball--the size of a cricket ball--midway
between the confronted players, whose object is to seize and convey
it between their own goals. The shock of the first onset to catch the
falling ball is very great, and the player who seizes it speeds home
pursued by his opponents, through whom he has to make his way, aided by
the jostlings of his own sidesmen. If caught and held, or in imminent
danger of it, he _throws_ the ball, but must in no case _give_ it, to
a comrade, who, if it be not arrested in its course, or he be jostled
away by his eager foes, catches it, and hurries home, winning the
game or _snotch_ if he contrive to _carry, not throw_, it between the
goals. A holder of the ball caught with it in his possession loses
a _snotch_. At the loss of each of these the game recommences after
a breathing time. Seven or nine _snotches_ are the game, and these
it will sometimes take two or three hours to win. Sometimes a large
football was used, and the game was then called "_kicking camp_," and
if played with the shoes on, "_savage camp_."--Abridged from Major
Moor's Description.
Ray says it prevailed, in his time, most in Norfolk, Suffolk, and
Essex. It was new to Sir T. Browne on his settling in Norfolk, and is
not mentioned by Strutt amongst the "Sports and Pastimes of the English
People."
Mr. Spurdens, in his Supplement to Forby's Vocabulary, remarks: "The
contests were not unfrequently fatal to many of the combatants. I have
heard old persons speak of a celebrated _Camping_, Norfolk against
Suffolk, on Diss Common, with 300 on each side. Before the ball was
thrown up, the Norfolk men inquired tauntingly of the Suffolk men if
they had brought their coffins. The Suffolk men after fourteen hours
were the victors. Nine deaths were the result of the contest within
a fortnight. These were called _fighting camps_, for much boxing was
practised in them." Cf.
"This faire floure of womanheed
Hath two pappys also smalle,
Bolsteryd out of lenghth and breed,
Lyche a large _Campyng ball_."
--Lydgate.
_Camping Land_ was a piece of ground set apart for the game. A field
abutting on the churchyard at Swaffham was willed for the purpose
by the Rector in 1472. At East Bilney and Stowmarket are pieces of
ground still called _Camping land_. Sir John Cullum, in his "History
of Hawstead, Suffolk," describes the _Camping-pightle_ as mentioned
A.D. 1466. "_Campar_ or _pleyar_ at foott balle, _campyon_ or
_champyon_."--Prompt. Parv. "Camping is Foot Ball playing, at which
they are very dextrous in Norfolk; and so many People running up and
down a piece of ground, without doubt evens and saddens it, so that the
Root of the Grass lies firm.... The trampling of so many People drives
also the Mole away."--T.R.
[E134] "All quickly forgot as a play on a stage." Comp. Shakspere,
As you Like it, Act ii. sc. 7: "All the world's a stage," etc., and
Merchant of Venice, Act i. sc. 1, where Antonio calls the world
"A stage where every man must play a part." "Totus mundus agit
histrionem," from a fragment of Petronius, is said to have been the
motto on the Globe Theatre. Calderon wrote a play called El Teatro del
Mundo (The Theatre of the World). It is remarkable for containing the
lines:
"En el teatro del mundo
Todos son representantes,"
_i.e._ in the stage of the world all men are players.--W. W. S. In the
old play of Damon and Pythias (Dodsley's Old Plays, ed. Hazlitt, iv.
31) the following occurs:
"Pythagoras said that this world was like a stage,
Where many play their parts: the lookers on, the sage
Philosophers are, said he, whose part is to learn
The manners of all nations, and the good from the bad to discern."
The same comparison occurs also in Don Quixote, part ii. cap. 12. See
note E378.
[E135] Psalm cxliv. 4.
[E136] "Atrop." "The fatall sisters," Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos,
daughters of Erebus and the Night, were supposed to spin out the life
of man as it were a long thread, which they drew out in length, till
his fatal hour had arrived; but if by any other casualty his days were
shortened, then _Atropos_ was said to have cut the thread in two. Hence
the old verse: "Clotho colum bajulat, Lachesis trahit, Atropos occat."
[E137] "Euer among," an expression of frequent occurrence in Early
English, meaning "constantly, continually." Compare the Mod. Eng. "all
the while." In a Carol of the fifteenth century, we read:
"Thys endus nyȝth
I saw a syȝth,
A stare as bryȝt as day;
And _ever among_
A mayden song
Lullay, by by, lullay."
And in another:
"Our der Lady she stod hym by,
And wepe water ful bytterly,
And terys of blod _ever among_."
[E138] "As onely of whom our comfort is had." The expression is
obscure, but the meaning is clear: as the only one from whom our
comfort (or strength) is derived.
[E139] "Good husbands," that is, good husbandmen or farmers.
[E140] "Then lightly," an old form of expression. Tusser means that
poor people are then _probably_ or _generally_ most sorely oppressed.
Cf. "Short summer _lightly_ has a forward spring."--Shakspere, Richard
III. Act iii. sc. 1.
[E141] "Few Capons are cut now except about Dorking in Surrey; they
have been excluded by the turkey, a more magnificent, but perhaps not a
better fowl."--Pegge's Forme of Cury, ed. 1780, p. 19.
[E142] "Vpon the tune of King Salomon." Mar. 4, 1559, there is a
receipt from Ralph Newberry for his licence for printing a ballad
called "Kynge Saloman," Registr. Station. Comp. Lond. notat. A fol.
48a. Again in 1562, a licence to print "iij balletts, the one entituled
'Newes oute of Kent;' the other, a 'Newe ballat after the tune of Kynge
Solomon;' and the third, 'Newes oute of Heaven and Hell.'"--_Ibid._
fol. 75a. Again, _ibid._ "Crestenmas Carowles auctorisshed by my lord
of London." A ballad of Solomon and the Queen of Sheba is entered in
1567, _ibid._ fol. 166a.--Warton's Hist. of Eng. Poetry, ed. Hazlitt,
vol. iii. p. 428.
[E143] There is some confusion here, although the sense is clear;
probably we should read, "and _flies_ from sinne," etc.
[E144] "Michel cries," _i.e._ to delay the operation of cutting, and
therefore the cries of the animals, till Michaelmas, will have the
effect of getting them into such condition as better to please the
butchers' eyes.
[E145] "Bulchin," a double diminutive = _bull-ock-in_, cf. _man-ik-in_.
"For ten mark men sold a little _bulchin_;
Litille less men tolde a bouke of a motoun;
Men gaf fiveten schillynges for a goos or a hen."
--R. de Brunne's Chronicle, ed. Hearne, i. 174.
See also Langtoft, p. 174, and Middleton, iii. 524.
[E146] "Apricot;" in Shakspere, and in other writers of that century,
apricock; in older writers abricot and abrecocke; from L. _præcoqua_
or _præcocia_ = early, from the fruit having been considered to be an
early peach. A passage in Pliny (Hist. Nat. xv. 12) explains its name:
"Post autumnum maturescunt Persica, æstate _præcocia_, intra xxx annos
reperta." Martial also refers to it in the following words:
"Vilia materius fueramus praecoqua ramis,
Nunc in adoptivis persica cara sumus."
--Liber xiii. Ep. 46.
The English, although they take their word from the French, at first
restored the _k_, and afterwards adopted the French termination,
_apricot_.--See a paper on the word in N.& Q. for November 23, 1850. "I
account the _White peare-plum stocks_ the best to _Inoculate Aprecock
buds upon_, although they may be done upon other _Plum-stocks_ with
good successe, if they be good juycie stocks, able to give a good
nourishment, for _Aprecock trees_ require much nourishment."--Austen's
Treatise on Fruit Trees, 1657, p. 57. Cotgrave (Fr. Dict.) gives,
"Abricot: m. The Abricot, or Apricocke plum." Minsheu (Span. Dict.
1599) has, "Albarcoque, or Alvarcoque, m. an apricocke." Compare
Midsummer Night's Dream, iii. 1. 169: "Feed him with apricocks and
dewberries"; and Rich. II. Act iii. sc. 4, 29: "Go bind you up yon
dangling apricocks."
[E147] "Boollesse." In the Grete Herball _bolays_, in Prompt. Parv.
_bolas_. Prunus communis, Huds.; var. insititia, L. In Bacon's Essays
xlvi. the name is spelt "_bullises_."
[E148] "Cheries." Austen, in his Treatise on Fruit Trees, Oxford, 1657,
p. 56, enumerates the following kinds of cherries: "The _Flanders
Cherry_, most generally planted, is a great bearing fruit. The _May
Cherries_ are tender, and the trees must be set in a warm place. The
_Black-hart Cherry_, a very speciall fruit, and a great bearing fruit,
and doubtlesse exceeding proper to presse for wine either to drink of
itselfe, or to mix the juyce with _Cider_ to give it a _colour_ as
_Clarret-wine_, it being of a deepe red, and a small quantity of it
will colour a gallon of _Cider_ or _White wine_. There is a _Cherry_
we call the _great bearing Cherry_ of M. Milleu. It may very well be
called the _great bearer_, for the trees seldome fayle of great store
of fruits, although in a cold and sharp spring."
[E149] "Chestnuts." Often spelt, but improperly, _chesnut_, as though
the _cheese_-like nut. From the O. Fr. _Chastaigne_, and the Ital.
_Castagna_, we learn its true derivation, namely from _Castanæa_ in
Thessaly, its native place.
[E150] "Cornet plums" = cornel plums; called also cornel cherry. O. Fr.
_cornille_, now _cornouille_, L. Lat. _cornolium_, from Lat. _cornus_ =
a cornel cherry tree.
[E151] "The _Damasco-plum_ is a good fruit and the trees beare
well."--Austen's Treatise on Fruit Trees, 1657.
[E152] Andrew Boorde, in his Introduction of Knowledge, ed. Furnivall,
p. 283, says: "_Fylberdes_ be better than hasell nuttes; yf they be
newe, and taken from the tree, and the skyn or the pyth pulled of, they
be nutrytyue, and doth increase fatnes."
[E153] "Goose beries." Dr. R. A. Prior says: "From the Flemish _kroes_
or _kruys berie_, Swed. _krusbär_, a word that bears the two meanings
of 'cross-' and 'frizzle-berry,' but was given to this fruit with the
first meaning, in reference to its triple spine, which not unfrequently
presents the form of a cross. This equivocal word was misunderstood and
taken in its other sense of 'frizzle-berry,' and translated into German
and herbalist Latin as '_kraüsel-beere_,' and '_uva crispa_.' The Fr.
_groseille_ and Span. _grosella_ are corruptions of Ger. _kraüsel_."
[E154] "Some Authors affirme that there have been _Vine-yards_ in
England in former times, though they be all destroyed long since.
Divers places retaine the name of Vine yards still, at _Bromwell Abby_
in _Norfolke_ and at Elie in Cambridgshiere which afforded _Wine_; what
else is the meaning of these old Rimes?
"'Quatuor sunt Elie, Lanterna, Capella Marias
Et molendinum, nec non dans Vinea vinum.'
"Englished thus:
"'Foure things of Elie Towne much spoken are,
The Leaden Lanthorn, Maries Chappell rare,
The mighty Mil-hill in the Minstre field,
And fruitful _Vine-yards_ which sweet wine doe yeeld.'
"And doubtlesse men might plant Vines with good successe, to make good
wine even with us. There are many kinds of Vines, but I know none so
good, and fit for our climate as the _Parsley Vine_ or Canada Grape, we
see by experience yearly it beares abundance of fruit unto perfection.
And whosoever would plant Vines in England I think he cannot meet
with a better kind than the _Parsley Vine_ both for _bearing_ and
_goodnesse_. The _Fox grape_ is a faire _large Fruit_ and a very
_great bearer_ although not of so much esteem as divers others. The
_Frantiniack Grape_ is of great accompt with many, and is a speciall
fruit where it comes to perfect ripenesse, which it hardly does, except
the Vine be set upon the _South-wall_ where it may have _much sun_.
The _Red_ and _White Muskadine Grape_ are speciall fruits and beare
very well, and come to perfect ripenesse if the Vine grow upon the
_South-wall_ or upon the _Easte-wall_ which is best next. There is the
_Curran Grape, Cluster Grape_, and many other kinds of good grapes, and
the fruits are _better_ or _worse_ according to the _place_ they grow
in: If they have _much sun_, and be _well ordered_, the fruit will be
_better_ and _sooner ripe_."--Austen's Treatise of Fruit Trees, 1657.
[E155] "There are very many kinds of _Plums_, many more than of
Cherries. I esteeme the _Mustle Plum_ one of the best, being a faire
large black plum, and of an excellent rellish, and the _trees beare
abundantly_. The Damazeene also is an excellent fruit. The _Violet_ and
_Premorden_ Plum-trees are very _great bearing trees_, and the fruits
pleasant and good. The _White Peare-plum-stocks_ are accounted the
best, and the _Damson-stocks_ the worst for grafting upon."--_Ibid._ p.
57.
[E156] "Hurtillberies (= Whortleberries) called 'Hurts' for shortness
at Godalming. I suspect this may be connected with Hurtmoor, the name
of a dale near Godalming."--Note by Rev. W. W. Skeat. "'Hurtilberries'
for 'whortleberries,' itself a corruption for 'myrtleberries.'"--Dr.
Prior, Popular Names of British Plants, 1870.
[E157] "Medlars, called in Normandy and Anjou _meslier_, from Lat.
_mespilus_, but as the verb _mesler_ became in English _meddle_, so
this fruit also, although a word of different origin, took a _d_ for an
_s_ and became _medlar_."--_Ibid._
"The Kernells [of medlers] bruised to dust, and drunk in liquor
(especially where Parsly roots have been steeped), doe mightily drive
out stones and gravell from the kidneyes."--Austen, Treatise on Fruit
Trees, 1657, p. 84.
[E158] "The _Iuyce of Mulberries_ is knowne by experience to be a
good remedy for a sore mouth, or throat, such as are perfectly ripe
relax the belly, but the unripe (especially dry'd) are said to bind
exceedingly, and therefore are given to such as have _Lasks and
Fluxes_."--_Ibid._ p. 84.
[E159] "Peach, in old works spelt Peske, Peesk, Peshe, and Peche, O.
Fr. _pesche_, L. _Persica_, formerly called _malum persicum_ = Persian
apple, from which the Arabs formed their name for it with the prefix
_el_ or _al_, and thence the Spanish _alberchigo_."--Dr. R. A. Prior.
Austen, in his work already quoted, says (p. 58): "Of _Peaches_ there
are divers kinds. I know by experience the _Nutmeg and Newington_
Peaches to be excellent fruits, especially the _Nutmeg_ Peach."
[E160] Evidently a misprint for Peare-plums, which is the reading
of all the later editions. Austen, in his Treatise on Fruit Trees,
recommends that Peaches be grafted on plum stocks, such as the _White
Peare-plum-stock_.
[E161] The word "Quince" preserves only a single letter of its
original form. A passage in the Romaunt of the Rose shows an early
form of the word, and also exhibits _chestnut_ and _cherry_ in a
transitional stage of adoption from the French. The author of the
Romaunt writes:
"And many homely trees there were,
That peaches, _coines_, and apples bere;
Medlers, plummes, peeres, chesteines,
Cherise, of which many one faine is."
It is evident that the English word is a corruption of the French
_coing_, which we may trace through the Italian _cotogna_ to Lat.
_cotonium_ or _cydonium malum_, the apple of Cydon, a town in
Crete.--Taylor's Words and Places. In the Paston Letters, i. 245,
occurs the word "chardequeyns," that is, a preserve made of quinces.
See also the Babees Book, E.E.T. Soc. ed. Furnivall, p. 152. In the
ordinances of the household of George, Duke of Clarence, p. 103,
_charequynses_ occur under the head of spices, their price being 5
shillings "the boke," or £2 10_s._ for 10 lbs., A.D. 1468.
[E162] "Respis." In Turner's Herbal called _Raspis_ or _Raspices_, the
latter of which is apparently a double plural. Probably from _resp_,
a word that in the Eastern counties means a shoot, a sucker, a young
stem, and especially the fruit-bearing stem of raspberries (Forby).
This name it may owe to the fact that the fruit grows on the young
shoots of the previous year.
[E163] "Reisons," most probably currants. "Raysouns of
Coraunte."--Pegge's Forme of Cury, ed. 1780, p. 16.
Turner (Names of Herbes) says the currant tree is called "in some
places of England a _Rasin_ tree."--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E164] "Seruice trees." Dr. R. A. Prior, in his Popular Names of
British Plants, 1870, p. 209, says: "Service-, or, as in Ph. Holland's
Pliny more correctly spelt, Servise-tree, from L. _Cervisia_, its fruit
having from ancient times been used for making a fermented liquor, a
kind of beer:
"Et pocula læti
Fermento atque acidis imitantur vitea _sorbis_.
--Virg. Georgics III. 379.
"Diefenbach remarks (Or. Eur. 102): 'bisweilen bedeutet cervisia einen
nicht aus Getreide gebranten Trank;' and Evelyn tells us in his Sylva
(ch. xv.), that 'ale and beer brewed with these berries, being ripe,
is an incomparable drink.' The _Cerevisia_ of the ancients was made
from malt, and took its name, we are told by Isidore of Seville, from
_Ceres, Cereris_, but this has come to be used in a secondary sense
without regard to its etymological meaning, just as in _Balm-tea_
we use tea in the sense of an infusion, without regard to its being
properly the name of a different plant." Wild Service, the rowan tree;
_Pyrus aucuiparia_, Gärt.
[E165] "Wallnuts are usually eaten after meales to close up the
stomach, and help digestion. And according to _Avicen_ (Can. lib. 2,
cap. 501), recentes sunt meliores stomacho (the newer the better for
the stomach). Bread or Bisket may be made of the meale being dried. The
young nuts peeled are preserved, and candied for Banquetting stuffe:
and being ripe the Kernells may be crusted over with sugar, and kept
long. _Avicen_ says (Can. lib. 2, cap. 501): 'Iuglans ficubus et Rutâ
medicina omnibus venenis': Wallnuts with Figs and Rue is a preservative
against all poison. Schol. Salern. reckons _Wallnuts_ for one of the
six things that resist poyson:
'Allia, Nux, Ruta, Pyra, Raphanus cum Theriaca:
Hæc sunt Antidotum contra mortale venenum.'
Garlicke, Rue, Peares, Treacle and Nuts:
Take these and then no deadly poyson hurts.
Mithridates the great: his preservative was (as is recorded by Pliny,
Nat. Hist. lib. 23, c. 18), '_Two Wallnuts_, two Figs, 20 leaves of
Rue and a grain of salt stamped together,' which taken no poyson that
day could hurt him. _Greene Wallnuts_ about Midsommer distilled and
drunk with vineger, are accounted a certain preservative against the
Pestilence."--Austen's Treatise of Fruit Trees, 1657. "_Walnuts_ be
hurtful to the memory, and so are Onyons, because they annoy the eyes
with dazeling dimnesse through a hoate vapour."--T. Newton, Touchstone,
ed. 1581, f. 125_b_. The original prescription of the antidote of
Mithridates, discovered by Pompey among the archives of the king, was
very simple. Q. Serenus tells us that
"Magnus scrinia regis
Cum raperet victor, vilem deprehendit in illis
Synthesin, et vulgata satis medicamina risit:
Bis denum rutæ folium, salis et breve granum,
Juglandesque duas, terno cum corpore ficus."
Cf. Piers Plowman, C. Text, Pass. xiii. 143:
"As in a _walnote_ withoute ys a byter barke,
And after þat biter barke be þe shele aweye,
Ys a curnel of comfort kynde to restorie."
On which see Mr. Skeat's note.
[E166] "Warden appulles rosted, stued, or baken, be nutrytyue,
and doth comfort the stomache, specyally yf they be eaten with
comfettes."--Andrew Boorde's Dyetary, ed. Furnivall, E.E.T. Soc. p.
284. And again, _ibid._ p. 291, as a remedy for the Pestilence: "Let
hym vse to eate stued or baken wardens, yf they can be goten; yf not,
eate stued or baken peers, with comfettes: vse no grosse meates, but
those the which be lyght of dygestyon."
[E167] "Froth" refers here to veal and pig and lamb, all three.
Halliwell suggests tender as the meaning. It seems to mean _pulpy_ or
_light_.
[E168] "Be greedie in spending," that is, he who is eager to spend and
careless in saving, will soon become a beggar, and he who is ready to
kill, and unskilful in storing, need look for no plenty.
[E169] There are certain wheels called Dredge Wheels, by the use
of which loads may be carried thro' meadows, even if it be not a
frost.--T.R.
[E170] "Doue houses." The Norfolk and Suffolk rebels, under Kett in
1549, say in their list of Grievances: "We p[r]ay that noman vnder
the degre of a knyght or esquyer, kepe a _dowe-house_, except it hath
byn of an ould aunchyent costome."--See Ballads from Manuscripts, ed.
Furnivall, i. 149.
[E171] "To buie at the stub," that is, to buy on the ground or on the
spot, and do the carriage oneself. A.S. _styb_, Dutch _stobbe_ = a
stump; whence Eng. _stubborn, stubble_.
[E172] "Edder and stake;" still in common use in Kent, Sussex, etc. See
Ray's Glossary, s.v. Yeather.
[E173] "So far as in lopping," etc., seems to imply that the tops will
take root of themselves without planting.
[E174] Spenser uses "Prime" in the sense of "Spring-time." See Fairy
Queene, Canto ii. st. 40, iv. 17, and vi. 13.
[E175] "Beliue" = in the night, according to Tusser Redivivus, but
wrongly. See Mr. Skeat's note in Ray's Glossary, _s.v._ Beliue.
[E176] Hugh Prowler is our Author's name for a night walker.--T.R.
[E177] Harrison, ed. 1587, fo. 42, speaks of sheep, "such as bring
foorth but one at a time," as _anelings_, from which it would seem that
_twinlings_ mean sheep such as _bring forth twins_ and _not the twins_
themselves. Dr. Mavor says: "Twin lambs are supposed to perpetuate
their prolific quality, and are therefore kept for breeders." In some
parts of Norfolk and Lincoln they will keep none but _twinlins_, but
then it is in rich land as Mershland and Holland.--T.R.
[E178] "Peccantem" should be _peccavi_, which is the reading of the
editions of 1573, 1585, and 1597.
[E179] "For yoke or the paile:" whether intended for the yoke or for
the dairy.
[E180] The strongest pigs are observed to suck foremost, because there
they find milk in the greatest abundance.--M.
[E181] "Yoong fils." We should certainly read, as required by the
rhythm of the line, _fillies_, which is found in the editions of 1573,
1577, and 1597.
[E182] "As concerning _Arbors, Seats, etc., in Orchards and Gardens_, I
advise men to make them of _Fruit trees_, rather then of _Privet_, or
other rambling stuffe, which yeelds no profit, but only for shade. If
you make them of _Cherry-trees, Plum-trees_, or the like, there will be
the same advantage for _shade_, and all the _Fruits_ superadded. All
that can be objected is, that _Fruit-trees_ are longer in growing up
then _Privet, Virgine Bower_, or the like, whereof arbors are commonly
made. It is answered. Though _Fruit-trees_ are something longer in
covering an _Arbor_, then some other things, yet they make sufficient
amends in their _lasting and bearing fruits_."--Austen's Treatise of
Fruit Trees, 1657, p. 61.
[E183] Oats sown in January would be most likely to rise free from
weeds, but it is not often that the season and the soil will admit
of such early culture. The whole stanza is somewhat enigmatical. The
earlier editions read uniformly: "by the hay," etc., but the more
modern have: "buy thee hay," etc., which is probably the correct
reading. The obvious meaning is, provide early what may be required,
that you may escape risk of failure and dearth. If you buy your hay in
May, you are prepared against the worst.
[E184] _Plash_ here means to pleach down a hedge over the burrows;
_set_ means plant over the place where the burrows are, not to stop the
rabbits from coming out, but to give them a means of escape from the
dogs who might otherwise _snap_ them up before they reached their holes.
[E185] A cage for moulting hawks was called a _mewe_. "For the better
preservation of their health they strowed mint and sage about them; and
for the speedier _mewing_ of their feathers they gave them the slough
of a snake, or a tortoise out of the shell, or a green lizard cut in
pieces."--Aubrey's Wilts. MS. p. 341. Ducange (Glossary M. et I. Lat.)
has "_Muta_, Accipitrum domuncula in qua includuntur falcones, cum
plumas mutant; accipitres enim quotannis pennas mutant."
[E186] "All's fish they get," etc. See Gascoyne's Steele Glass, Arber's
Reprint, p. 57.
[E187] "Feb, fill the dike." In Mr. Robinson's Whitby Glossary is given
as a weather expression of Yorkshire: "February fill-dike, and March
muck't out." Another form is in Hazlitt's Eng. Proverbs:
"February fill dike be it black or be it white:
But if it be white, it's better to like."
"Fevrier remplit les fosses: Mars les seche."--Fr. Provb.
See also Swainson's Weather Folklore, pp. 40-42.--Note by Mr. J.
Britten, F.L.S.
[E188] "Leaue iobbing," _i.e._ leave off jobbing, or pecking, with
their beaks. See Prompt. Parv. p. 36. "Bollyn, or _jowin_ wythe the
bvlle as byrdys (byllen or _iobbyn_ as bryddys K. _iobbyn_ with the byl
H.P.). _Rostro_."
[E189] See note E112.
[E190] Moles, for the trapping of which each parish used to maintain
a sapper and miner, are found to be excellent husbandmen, the little
heaps of friable soil which they throw up furnishing, when spread
abroad, the best of top dressings. "It may be novel to some to be
informed that moles may be taken with dogs, properly trained. This may
serve to diversify the life of a professed hunter."--M.
[E191] As for _mole-hills_ forming a warm and dry station for lambs,
the same may be said with much greater propriety of _ant-hills_; yet
neither would be suffered to remain on a well-managed farm.
[E192] Lease, a small enclosure near the homestall.--M. A name used in
some countries for a small piece of ground of 2 or 3 acres.--T.R.
[E193] "Mestlen." "Years ago in Norfolk thousands of acres yeelded
no better grain crop than rye, of which the bread of farm households
was made. _Meslin_ bread made of wheat and rye in equal quantity was
for the master's table alone."--Forby. "And there at the manor of
Marlingford, and at the mill loaded both carts with _Mestlyon_ and
Wheat."--Paston Letters, iii. p. 294. "For they were neither hogs nor
devils, nor devilish hogs, nor hoggish devils, but a _mesling_ of the
two."--Fairfax. The mixed grain, meslin, was used in France in the
concoction of beer, as appears by the regulations for the brewers of
Paris, 1254, who were to use "grains, c'est à savoir, d'orge, de_
mestuel, _et de_ dragée."--Reglements t. Louis IX. ed. Depping, p.
29. At a dinner given in 1561 to the Duke of Norfolk by the Mayor of
Norwich, there were provided: "xvj loves white bread iv_d._, xviij
loves wheaten bread, ix_d._, iij loves _mislin_ bread iij_d._"--Leland,
Itin. vi. xvii. Plot (Hist. of Oxford, p. 242) says that the
Oxfordshire land termed sour is good for wheat and "miscellan," namely
wheat and rye mixed.
[E194] It is to be regretted, both on the score of policy and health,
that in reforming false principles, we renounced salutary practices.
Days of abstinence from flesh-meat, if not prescribed by authority,
should be voluntarily imposed on ourselves. If the fisherman purchases
bread of the farmer, the farmer in his turn ought to encourage the
fisherman, who in peace and war has the highest claims to support.--M.
[E195] "Auens." "Avence herbe, Avancia, Sanamunda."--Prompt. Parv. By
some called _harefoot_. It was used in cookery; see Pegge's Forme of
Cury, ed. 1780, p. 13.
[E196] "Betanie." Lat. _betonica_, said by Pliny to have been first
called _Vettonica_, from the Vettones, a people of Spain.
[E197] "Bleets." The name of some pot-herb which Evelyn in Acetaria
takes to be the "Good Henry," and remarks of it that, "'tis insipid
enough." βλιτον [Greek: bliton] = insipid. In Lyte's Dodoens, p. 547,
are given three kinds of Blitte or Bleet, and the French name is said
to be _Pourrée rouge_. "_Suæda maritima_, or sea-blite, belongs to the
goose-foot tribe; the good-king-Henry, or _Chenopodium bonus-Henricus_,
is of the same tribe. See Flowers of the Field, by C. A. Johns."--Note
by Rev. W. W. Skeat.
"Beets," although joined here with "bleets," no doubt refers to the
common beetroot, _Beta vulgaris_, Linn. Gerard had the "White or Yellow
Beete" in his garden.--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E198] "Bloodwoort," called also Bloody-dock, from its red veins and
stems. _Rumex sanguineus_, L. Called also _Walwort_ and Danewort in
Lyte's Dodoens, 1578, p. 380, who says that the "fumes of Walwort
burned, driueth away Serpentes and other venemous beastes."
[E199] "The rootes of Borage and _Buglosse_ soden tender and made
in a Succade, doth ingender good blode, and doth set a man in a
temporaunce."--A. Boorde's Dyetary, E.E.T. Soc. ed. Furnivall, p. 278.
[E200] "Burnet, a term formerly applied to a brown cloth, Fr.
_brunette_, It. _brunetta_, and given to the plant so called from its
brown flowers."--Dr. Prior, Popular Names of British Plants, 1870.
Called also _Pimpinell_.--Lyte's Dodoens, 1578, p. 138.
[E201] "Burrage." Fr. _bourache_, M. Lat. _borago_. Apuleius says that
its original name was "_corrago_, quia cordis affectibus medetur," a
word that the herbalists suppose to have become, by change of _c_ to
_b, borrago_. See A. Boorde's Dyetary, ed. Furnivall, pp. 278-280.
[E202] "Clarie." M. Lat. _sclarea_, from _clarus_ = clear, and prefix
_ex_. Called by the apothecaries _clear-eye_, translated into _Oculus
Christi, Godes-eie_, and _See-bright_, and eye-salves made of it.
_Salvia Sclarea_, Linn. "Called in French _Ornale_ or _Fonte-bonne_;
it maketh men dronke and causeth headache, and therefore some Brewers
do boyle it with their Bier in steede of Hoppes."--Lyte's Dodoens, ed.
1578, p. 253.
[E203] "Coleworts." Dioscorides (quoted in Cogan's Haven of Health,
p. 49) says (lib. 2, cap. 113) that "if they be eaten last after
meats, they preserue the stomacke from surfetting, and the head from
drunkennesse. Yea some write, that if one would drinke much wine for a
wager, and not be drunke, but to haue also a good stomacke to meate,
that he should eate before the banquet raw Cabage leaues with Vinegar
so much as he list, and after the banquet to eate againe foure or fiue
raw leaues, which practice is much vsed in Germanie.... The Vine and
the Coleworts be so contrarie by nature that if you plant Coleworts
neere to the rootes of the Vine, of it selfe it will flee from them.
Therefore it is no maruaile if Colewortes be of such force against
drunkennesse; But I trust no student will prooue this experiment,
whether he may be drunken or not, if he eate Coleworte leaues before
and after a feast."
[E204] The numerous virtues of this herb are thus summed up in the
King's Coll. MS. of the Promptorium:
"Bis duo dat maratrum, febres fugat atque venenum,
Et purgat stomacum, sic reddit lumen acutum."
Macer gives a detailed account, in which the following remarkable
passages occur: "þe edderes wole ete fenel, when her yen dasnyþ, and
so she getiþ ayene her clere sighte; and þer þoroghe it is founde and
preved þat fenel doþ profit to mannis yene: þe yen þat ben dusked,
and dasniþ, shul be anoynted with þe ius of fenelle rotis medeled
with hony; and þis oynement shalle put a-way alle þe dasewenesse of
hem, and make hem bryȝt." The virtue of fennel in restoring youth,
was a discovery attributed by Macer to serpents; "Þis prouiþ auctours
and filisoferis, for serpentis whan men _(sic)_ olde, and willeth
to wexe stronge, myghty, and yongly a-yean, þei gon and eten ofte
fenel, and þei become yongliche and myghty."--MS. in the possession
of H. W. Diamond, Esq. This herb is called in German _Fenchel_, Dutch
_Venckel_. In Piers Plowman mention occurs of: "A ferthyng worth of
fynkel-sede for fastinge daies;" C. vii. 360; spelt fenel in the other
texts. "Fenkylle or fenelle, _feniculum_."--Prompt. Parv. "Fenelle or
fenkelle, _feniculum, maratrum_."--Catholicon Anglicum.
[E205] "Andreas the Herborist writeth that the root of the Langdebeefe
tyed or bounde to the diseased place, swageth the ache of the veynes
(called _Varix_) being to muche opened or enlarged and fylled with
grosse blood."--Lyte's Dodoens, 1578, p. 568. See also Gerard's Herbal,
1633.
This is no doubt _Helminthia echioides_, Linn., of which Parkinson
(_Paradisus_) gives a good description and figure under this name, and
says, "The leaves are onely used ... for an herbe for the pot among
others." Lyte's reference is to some other plant which has "a purple
flower."--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E206] "Leek." A remnant of A.S. _porleac_, from Lat. _porrum_ and
_leac_ = a plant, Ger. _lauch_.
[E207] "Longwort," called in Lyte's Dodoens, p. 125, Sage of Jerusalem,
"whiche herbe hath no particular vse in Physicke, but it is much vsed
in Meates and Salades with egges, as is also Cowslippes and Prymeroses,
whervnto in temperature it is much like." See also Gerard's Herbal,
1633, where it is called "Cowslips of Jerusalem."
[E208] "Liuerwort," so called from the liver shape of the thallus,
and its supposed effects in disease of the liver. O. L. Ger.
_Steenleuerwnyt_. According to Lyte's Dodoens, p. 59, "a soueraigne
medicine against the heate and inflammation of the Lyuer, and all hoate
Feuers or Agues." _Anemone Hepatica_, Linn.
The first portion of this note refers to a Cryptogam called Liverwort,
having nothing to do with the plant meant by Tusser.--Note by Mr. J.
Britten, F.L.S.
[E209] "Marigolds are hote and drye, an herbe well knowen and as vsual
in the kitchin as in the hal: the nature whereof is to open at the
Sunne rising, and to close vp at the Sunne setting. It hath one good
propertie and very profitable for Students, that is by the vse thereof
the sight is sharpened. And againe the water distilled of Marigolds
when it flowreth, doth help the rednesse and inflammation of the eyes
if it be dropped into them, or if a linnen cloth wet in the water be
laid upon them. Also the powder of Marigolds dried, being put into the
hollownesse of the teeth, easeth toothach. And the juice of the herbe
mingled with a little salt, and rubbed often times vpon Warts, at
length weareth them away."--Cogan's Haven of Health, ch. 63. Called in
the Grete Herbal _Mary Gowles_, a name that seems to have originated in
the A.S. _mersc-mear-gealla_ = marsh-horse-gowl, the marsh marigold,
or _caltha_, transferred to the exotic plant of our gardens and
misunderstood as _Mary Gold_. It is often mentioned as Gold simply by
our older poets:
"That she sprunge up out of the molde
Into a floure was named _golde_."
--Gower, ed. 1554, f. 120.
"The yellow marigold, the sunne's own flower," says Heywood in Marriage
Triumphe, and "so called," says Hyll (Art of Gard. ch. xxx.), "for that
after the rising of the sun unto noon, this flower openeth larger and
larger; but after the noontime unto the setting of the sun the flower
closeth more and more, so that after the setting thereof it is wholly
shut up."
"The marigold observes the sun,
More than my subjects me have done."
--K. Charles I.
[E210] "Mercurie." A name rather vaguely applied in old works,
probably the "Good Henry, _Chenopodium Bonus Henricus_." Called also
"Allgood," Dutch _algoede_, Ger. _allgut_, from Lat. _tota bona_,
Cotgrave and Palsgrave _toutte bonne_, on account of its excellent
qualities as a remedy and as an esculent; hence the proverb: "Be thou
sick or whole, put _Mercury_ in thy koale."--Cogan, Haven of Health,
ch. 28. "The Barons Mercury, or male Phyllon dronken, causeth to
engender male children, and the Mayden Mercurie, or gyrles Phyllon
dronken, causeth to engender Gyrles or Daughters."--Lyte's Dodoens, p.
78.
It is still much grown in some districts, as in Lincolnshire (where it
is called "Marquerry"), being boiled and eaten as spinach.--Note by Mr.
J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E211] "Nep," common Cat-mint. "Dronken with honied water is good
for them that haue fallen from a lofte, and haue some bruse or
squat, and bursting, for it digesteth the congeled and clotted
bloud, and is good for the payne of the bowels, the shortnesse of
breath, the oppillation or stopping of the breast, and against the
Jaundice."--Lyte, p. 148. See also Gerard's Herbal, 1633. "Nepe, herbe,
_Coloquintida, cucurbita_."--Prompt. Parv. "Neppe, an herbe, _herbe du
chat_."--Palsgrave. Forby gives the Norfolk simile "as white as _nep_,"
in allusion to the white down which covers this plant.
The plant referred to in the quotation from the Prompt. Parv. is not
that meant by Tusser.--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E212] "Orach," _Atriplex hortensis_, or _sativa_, formerly _Arach_,
Prompt. Parv. _Arage_, in MS. Harl. 979 _Arasches_, Fr. _arroche_, from
Low Lat. _aurago_ from _aurum_ = gold, by the addition to it of _ago_
= wort, as in plantago, lappago, etc. At the same time its use in the
cure of jaundice, _aurugo_, may have fixed upon the plant the name of
the disease.
"_Atriplicem_ tritam cum nitro, melle, et aceto,
Dicunt appositam calidam sedare podagram:
_Ictericis_ dicitque Galenus tollere morbum
Illius semen cum vino sæpius haustum."
--Macer, cap. xxviii. l. 7, quoted by Dr. Prior.
[E213] "Patience," called in Lyte's Dodoens, p. 559, "Wild Docke," and
stated to be a remedy for jaundice, the "bitinges and stinginges of
Scorpions," and the tooth ache, and if "hanged about the necke it doth
helpe the kinges euill or swelling in the throte."
[E214] If the virtues of Penny Royal, as stated in Lyte's Dodoens, p.
232, be true, the use of it might now be advantageously adopted by the
consumers of London drinking water. He says: "If at any time men be
constrayned to drinke _corrupt, naughtie, stinking,_ or salte water,
throw Penny royal into it, or strow the pouder thereof into it, and it
shall not hurte any bodie." It is sometimes called Pudding-grass, from
its being used to make stuffings for meat, formerly called _puddings_.
It is recommended by Andrew Boorde (Dyetary, ed. E.E.T. Soc. p. 281) as
a remedy for melancholy, and to comfort the spirits of men.
[E215] "Primerose," from _Pryme rolles_, the name it bears in old
books and MSS. The Grete Herball, ch. cccl. says: "It is called _Pryme
Rolles_ of _pryme tyme_, because it beareth the first floure in _pryme
tyme_." It is also so called in Frere Randolph's Catalogue. Chaucer
writes it in one word _primerole_. (See also MS. Addit. 11, 307, f. 37:
"He shal ben lyk the lytel bee
That seketh the blosme on the tre,
And souketh on the _prumorole_.")
_Primerole_ is an abbreviation of Fr. _primeverole_, It. _primaverola_,
dimin. of _prima vera_, from _fior di prima vera_ = the first spring
flower. Primerole, as an outlandish unintelligible word, was soon
familiarized into _prime rolles_, and this into _primrose_. This is
explained in popular works as meaning the first rose of the spring,
a name that never could have been given to a plant that in form and
colour is so unlike a rose. But the rightful claimant is, strange
to say, the _daisy_, which in the South of Europe is a common and
conspicuous flower in early spring, while the _primrose_ is an
extremely rare one, and it is the _daisy_ that bears the name in
all the old books. See Fuchs, Hist. Stirpium, 1542, p. 145, where
there is an excellent figure of it, titled _primula veris_; and the
Ortus Sanitatis, ed. Augsb. 1486, ch. cccxxxiii., where we have a
very good woodcut of a daisy titled "masslieben, _Premula veris_,
Latine." Brunfelsius, Novum Herbarium, ed. 1531, speaking of the
Herba paralysis, the cowslip, says, p. 1590, expressly, "Sye würt von
etlichen Doctores _Primula veris_ genaunt, das doch falsch ist wann
_Primula veris_ ist matsomen oder zeitlosen." Brunschwygk (De Arte
Distillandi, 1500, book ii. c. viii.) uses the same words. The Zeitlose
is the daisy. Parkinson (Th. Bot. p. 531) assigns the name to both the
daisy and the primrose. Matthioli (ed. Frankfort, 1586, p. 653) calls
his Bellis Major "_Primo fiore maggiore_, seu _Fiore di prima vera_,
nonnullis _Primula veris major_" and figures the moon-daisy. His Bellis
minor, which seems to be our daisy, he calls "_Primo fiore minore,
Fior di primavera_, Gallis _Marguerites_, Germanis _Masslieben_." At
p. 883, he figures the cowslip, and calls that also "_Primula veris_,
Italis _Fiore di primavera_, Gallis _primevere_."--Dr. Prior's Pop.
Names of British Plants. "_Petie Mulleyn_ (whiche we call _Cowslippe_
and _Primerose_) is of two sortes. The smaller sorte, which we call
Primerose, _Herbasculum minus_, is of diuers kindes, as yellow and
greene, single and dubble."--Lyte's Dodoens, p. 122.
Lupton (Book of Notable Things, v. 89) speaks of "Primroses, which some
take to be Daisies."--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E216] "Rosemary," Lat. _rosmarinus_, sea-spray, from its usually
growing on the sea-coast and its odour, is recommended by Lyte for
fastening loose teeth. "Take of rewe a grete quantite, and sawge halfe
als mekille, and _rosemaryne_ the same quantitee."--MS. Linc. Med. f.
283. According to Andrew Boorde it is a remedy for "palses and for the
fallynge syckenes, and for the cowghe, and good agaynst colde."
[E217] "Safron," Sp. _azafran_, from Arabic _al zahafaran_. On the
cultivation, etc., of Saffron in England, there is a long account in
Harrison's Description of England, book iii. cap. 24. See note E354.
[E218] "Spinage." "Called in Arabic _Hispanach_; 'Arabicæ factionis
principes _Hispanach_, hoc est, Hispanicum olus nominant.'--Fuchs,
Hist. Stirp. p. 668. Dodoens (bk. v. 1. 5) tells us, '_Spinachiam_
nostra ætas appellat, nonnulli _spinacheum_ olus. Ab Arabibus et
Serapione _Hispanac_ dicitur.' Brunfelsius (ed. 1531) says expressly
at p. 16, 'Quæ vulgo _spinachia_ hodie, Atriplex _Hispaniensis_ dicta
est quondam; eo quod ab Hispania primum allata est ad alias exteras
nationes.' Tragus also calls it _Olus Hispanicum_; Cotgrave, _Herbe
d'Espaigne_; and the modern Greeks σπαναχιον [Greek: spanachion]."--Dr.
R. A. Prior.
[E219] Lyte, p. 642, says: "_Cyues_ or Rushe onions: this kinde of
Leekes is called in English Cyues, and of Turner in Latine, _Cepa
pallacana_, and in Greke Gethyun, which he Englisheth by al these
names, a Cyue, a Civet, a Chyue, or _Sweth_."
[E220] "Tanzie," Fr. _athanasie_, contracted to _tanacée_ and
_tanaisie_. Lyte says, p. 18, that it was sold in the shops under the
name of _Athanasia_, the Greek word for immortality, and that it was so
called, "quod non cito flos inarexat." A cake used to be made in which
tansy was one of the ingredients, and which was called Tansay-Cake. The
following recipe for it is given in MS. Sloane 1986, f. 100:
"Breke egges in bassyn, and swynge hem sone,
Do powder of peper therto anone,
Then grynde _tansay_, tho juse owte wrynge,
To blynde with tho egges, withowte lesynge.
In pan or skelet thou shalt hit frye,
In buttur well skymm et wyturly,
Or white grece thou may take therto,
Geder hit on acake, thenne hase thou do,
With platere of tre, and frye hit browne,
On brodeleches serve hit thou schalle,
With fraunche-mele* or other metis withalle."
* A dish composed chiefly of eggs and sheeps' fat.
In Halliwell's Dict. is also given a recipe for a dish called
_Tansie_. Cogan, in his Haven of Health, p. 65, says: "It is much vsed
among vs in England about Easter, with fried egs, not without good
cause, to purge away the fleame engendred of fish in Lent season,
whereof wormes are soone bred in them that be thereto disposed, though
the common people vnderstand not the cause, why _Tansies_ are more vsed
after Lent, than at any other time of the yeare." "To prevent being
Bug-bitten. Put a sprig or two of _Tansy_ at the bed head, or as near
the pillow as the smell may be agreeable."--T. Cosnett's Footman's
Directory, p. 292. "For to dystroy a Wrang Nayle, othewyse callyd a
Corne. Take wylde _tansey_, and grynde yt, and make yt neshe, and ley
it therto, and it wyl bryng yt owght."--Lambeth MS. 306, f. 65, quoted
in Political, Relig. and Love Poems (E. E. Text Soc. ed. Furnivall), p.
36.
The wild tansey is not Tusser's plant.--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E221] "Blessed Thistle." "So worthily named for the singular vertues
that it hath.... It sharpneth the wit and memorie, strengthneth all the
principall parts of the bodie, quickneth all the senses, comforteth
the stomacke, procureth appetite, and hath a speciall vertue against
poyson, and preserueth from the Pestilence, and is excellent good
against any kinde of Feuer, being vsed in this manner: Take a dramme
of the powder, put it into a good draught of ale or wine, warme it and
drink it a quarter of an hour before the fit doth come, then goe to
bed, couer you well with clothes and procure sweate, which by the force
of the herbe will easily come foorth, and so continue vntill the fit be
past.... For which notable effects this herbe may worthily be called
_Benedictus_ or _Omnimorbia_, that is a salue for euery sore, not
knowen to Physitians of old time, but lately reuealed by the speciall
providence of Almighty God."--Cogan's Haven of Health, p. 545.
[E222] "Purslane," in Turner's Herball _Purcellaine_, in the Grete
Herball _Porcelayne_, in Dodoens _Purcelayne_. "It is good against St.
Antonies fier, called _erysipelas_."--Lyte's Dodoens, p. 576. "Purslain
in Latin is called _Portulaca, a portula_ = a little gate, because they
fancied it to be like one."--Lemery's Treatise on Foods, 1704, p. 92.
[E223] "Rampions," Fr. _raiponce_, "a word mistaken as in the case
of _cerise_ and _pease_, for a plural, and the _m_ inserted for
euphony."--Dr. Prior, Popular Names of British Plants.
[E224] "Men say that who so taketh the seede of Rockat before he be
beaten or whipt, shalbe so hardened that he shall easily endure the
payne, according as Plinie writeth."--Lyte's Dodoens, p. 622. What a
pity Tusser did not know of this property of the Rocket! from his own
account he had plenty of opportunities of testing it at Eton.
[E225] "Sage causeth wemen to be fertill, wherefore in times past the
people of Egypt, after a great mortalite and pestilence, constreyned
their wemen to drinke the iuyce therof, to cause them the sooner to
conceyue, and to bring foorth store of children."--Lyte's Dodoens, p.
252.
[E226] "Sea holie." _Eryngium maritimum_, Linn. "The leaves are good
to be eaten in sallads."--Langham's Garden of Health. "The young and
tender shoots are eaten of divers either raw or pickled."--Parkinson,
Theatrum Botanicum, 1640, p. 988.--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E227] "Sampere is a weede growing neare the sea-side, and is very
plentifull about the Ile of Man, from whence it is brought to diuers
parts of England, preserved in Brine, and is no lesse wholesome than
Capers."--Cogan's Haven of Health, p. 64. The Eng. Samphire is a
corruption of the Fr. Herbe de _Saint Pierre_, from its growing on the
rocks on the sea-shore. The leaves are used in the form of a pickle as
an article of diet.
[E228] "The _Ionians_ had so much Veneration for them that they swore
by _Cabbages_, and were therein as superstitious as the _Egyptians_,
who gave divine Honours to _Leeks_ and _Onions_, for the great Benefits
which they said they received from them."--Lemery's "Treatise on
Foods," 1704, p. 73.
[E229] "Citrons," according to Lyte, p. 704, will cure "tremblynge
of the hart and pensiue heavinesse, wamblynges, vomitinges, and
lothsomnesse of the stomache." The citron was probably introduced into
Europe with the orange by the Arab conquerors of Spain, and first
received in England from that country. By a MS. in the Tower it appears
that in 1290, 18 Edw. I., a large Spanish ship came to Portsmouth,
and that from her cargo Queen Eleanor purchased Seville figs, dates,
pomegranates, 15 _Citrons_, and 7 _poma de orenge_.--Way in Prompt.
Parv.
[E230] "The garden Basill is called in English _Basill Royall_ or
_Basill gentle_, and the smaller kinde is called _Bushse_ (sic)
_Basill_. The herbe brused with vineger and holden to the nose of
suche as are faynt and fallen into a sound bringeth them againe to
themselues, and the seede therof giuen to be smelled upon causeth the
sternutation or niesing."--Lyte's Dodoens, p. 241. "One thing I read in
Hollerius (Lib. i. cap. i.) of Basill, which is wonderfull. 'A certaine
Italian, by often smelling to Basill, had a scorpion bred in his
braine, and after vehement and long paines he died thereof.'"--Cogan's
Haven of Health, p. 50. See also 51. 34.
[E231] "Costmary, L. _Costus amarus_, Fr. _coste amere_, misunderstood
as _Costus Mariæ_, an error that has very naturally arisen from this
plant having been dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene, and called after
her, _Maudlin_, either in allusion to her box of scented ointment, or
to its use in the uterine affections over which she presided. In old
authors it occurs as _Herba sanctæ_ or _divæ Mariæ_."--Dr. R. Prior,
Popular Names of Brit. Plants. Called also Alecost from its having
formerly been esteemed an agreeable aromatic bitter, and much used for
flavouring ale: "If you list to make a pleasant drinke, and comfortable
to the stomache, put certaine handfuls of this herbe in the bottome of
a vesselle, and tunne up new Ale vpon it."--Cogan, Haven of Health, ch.
69.
[E232] "Paggles," spelt also Paigle, Pagle, Pagel, Peagle, Pegyll and
Pygil, a name now confined to the Eastern Counties, and generally
assigned to the Cowslip, but by Ray and Moor to the _Ranunculus
bulbosus_. The derivation is uncertain. "Blake (yellow) as a
paigle."--Ray. In Suffolk the name is applied to the Crowfoot, the
_Cuckoo-flower_.
[E233] "Our common germander or thistle benet is found and knowne to
bee so wholesome and of so great power in medicine, as anie other
hearbe, if they be vsed accordinglie."--Harrison, Descript. of Eng.,
ed. Furnivall, pt. i. p. 326. "The iuyce of the leaues mengled with
oyle, and straked vpon the eyes, driueth away the white cloude,
called the Hawe or Pearle in the eye, and all manner dimness of the
same."--Lyte's Dodoens, p. 25.
[E234] "That which is commonly called Sothernewood is the male kinde
of this herbe, and that which we doe call _Lauender-cotten_ is the
female, named in Latine _Cypressus_ or _Santolina_. The setting of
_Lauender-cotten_ within the house in floure pots must needes be very
wholesome, for it driveth away venemous wormes, both by strawing, and
by the sauour of it, and being drunke in wine it is a remedie against
poyson."--Cogan's Haven of Health, p. 56.
[E235] "Mawdelin," spelt also _Maudlin, Mawdeleyn_ and _Maudeline_,
appears to have derived its name similarly to _Costmary_, q.v., and to
have been applied to the same uses.
[E236] "Baies," Bays, from French _baie_, which is formed from
Lat. _bacca_ = a berry. In old writers _bay_ is used for a _berry_
generally, as "the bayes of ivyne," but in time the term came to be
applied to the berries of the _sweet bay_, called by Virgil _lauri
baccas_, from their being an article of commerce; from the berry the
term was extended to the tree itself.
[E237] "Bachelor's Buttons." So called, according to Johnson's Gerarde,
p. 472, "from their similitude to the jagged cloathe buttons anciently
worne in this kingdom," but according to others from "a habit of
country fellows to carry them in their pockets to divine their success
with their sweethearts." Called by Lyte (Dodoens, p. 421), _Goldcup_
or _Gold knoppe_, and described as a double variety of the flower now
known so well as the Butterflower, or Buttercup, the Fr. _bouton d'or_.
[E238] "Columbine," called Colourbine in Lincoln, _Aquilegia vulgaris_,
used for making stuffed chine.
"There are many sorts of Colombines, as well differing in forme as
colour of the flowers, and of them both single and double carefully
noursed up in our gardens, for the delight both of their forme and
colours."--Parkinson, _Paradisus_, 1629, p. 271.--Note by Mr. J.
Britten, F.L.S.
[E239] "Daffadowndilly, Daffodilly, Affodilly, and Daffodil, Lat.
_asphodelus_, from which was formed Affodilly, the name of it in all
the older writers, but subsequently confused with that of another
flower, the so-called _sapharoun_ or saffron _lily_:
"'The thyrde _lylye_ ȝyt there ys,
That ys called felde lylye, y wys,
Hys levys be lyke to _sapharoun_,
Men know yt therby many one.'
--MS. Sloane, 1571.
"With the taste for alliteration that is shown in popular names, the
_Sapharoun-lily_, upon blending with _affodilly_, became, by a sort
of mutual compromise, _daffadowndilly_, whence our _daffodilly_ and
_daffodil_."--Dr. R. A. Prior, Popular Names of British Plants. "Strew
me the ground with daffadowndillies."--Spenser, Shep. Cal. 140.
[E240] "Eglantine," a word of doubtful origin. Chaucer writes it
_eglatere_ and _eglentere_. Fr. _aiglantier_, Prov. _aiglentina_ = wild
rose. Diez derives it from Lat. _aculeus_ = a prickle, through the adj.
_aculentus_.
[E241] Feverfew (_Pyrethrum parthenium_), a genus of Composite
plants, common in our gardens, and deriving its name from having long
been employed as a popular remedy in ague and other fevers, and as an
emmenagogue. It appears to possess stimulant and tonic properties. It
is a perennial plant, and may attain a height of one or two feet. Its
leaves are flat and broad, its flowers small. It is nearly allied to
Camomile. The variety grown in gardens is well known under the name of
"golden feather."
[E242] "Flower armor," evidently the _Floramor_, Fr. _fleur d'amour_,
from a misconception of its Latin name _Amaranthus_, as though a
compound of _Amor_, love, and _anthus_, a flower.
[E243] "Flower de luce," the _flos deliciarum_ of the Middle Ages.
Ducange, quoting from the history of the Harcourts, says:--"Thomas,
Dux Exoniæ habet comitatum de Harcourt ... per homagium ac reddendum
_florem deliciarum_ apud Castrum de Rouen," etc. (A.D. 1423).
Another derivation is as follows:--"Louis VII. dit le Jeune, prit le
premier des _fleurs de lis_, par allusion à son nom de Loys (comme
on l'écrivait alors). On a dit dans ce temps-là _Fleur de Loys_,
puis _Fleur de Louis_, enfin, _Fleur de Lis_." (Grandmaison, Dict.
Heraldique.) The flower that he chose seems to have been a _white_ one,
for Chaucer says:
"His nekke was white as is the flour de lis."
In E. K.'s Glossary to Spenser's Shep. Cal. April, we read "_Flower
delice_, that which they use to misterme _Flowre deluce_ being in the
Latine called _Flos delitiarum_."
[E244] According to Lyte the Flower Gentle is identical with the
Floramor (see above). Various species of _Amaranthus_, including the
Flower amor (43. 10), and what we now call _Celosia cristata_, or
Cockscomb, were included under this name. Parkinson (Paradisus, p. 370)
says: "We have foure or five sorts of Flower-gentle to trimme up this
our Garden withall."--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E245] "Gilliflower, formerly spelt _gyllofer_ and _gilofre_ with the
_o_ long, from Fr. _giroflée_, ltal. _garofalo_, in Douglas's Virgil
_jereflouris_, words formed from M. Lat. _garoffolum, gariofilum_, or,
as in Albert Magn. (lib. vi. cap. 22), _gariofilus_, corrupted from
Lat. _caryophyllum_ = a clove, and referring to the spicy odour of the
flower, which seems to have been used in flavouring wines to replace
the more costly clove of India. The name was originally given in India
to plants of the Pink tribe, especially the carnation, but has in
England been transferred of late years to several Cruciferous plants.
That of Chaucer, Spenser, and Shakspere was, as in Italy, _Dianthus
caryophyllus_, Linn., that of later writers and gardeners _Matthiola_
and _Cheiranthus_, Linn. Much of the confusion in the names of plants
has arisen from the vague use of the French terms _Giroflée, Oeillet_,
and _Violette_, which were, all three of them, applied to flowers of
the Pink tribe, but subsequently extended, and finally restricted in
English to very different plants. _Giroflée_ has become _Gilliflower_,
and passed over to the _Cruciferæ, Oeillet_ has been restricted to
the _Sweet Williams_, and _Violette_ has been appropriated to one
of the numerous claimants of its name, the genus to which the pansy
belongs."--Dr. R. A. Prior.
[E246] "Holiokes," in Huloet's Dict. Holy Hoke. Wedgwood (Etym. Dict.)
derives it from A.S. _hoc_, Welsh _hocys_ = a mallow, and says that it
obtained the title of _Holy_ from its being brought from the Holy Land,
where it is indigenous.
[E247] "Indian Eie." This was probably a _Dianthus_ of some kind
(French _œillet_), the same perhaps which is now grown in our gardens
as Indian or Chinese Pink.
[E248] _Laus tibi_, "a narcissus with white flowers. It groweth
plenteously in my Lorde's garden in Syon and it is called of divers
White Laus tibi."--Turner's Herball, pt. ii. b. 2. "It is very
difficult to ascertain what plant was meant by this name, which is
also mentioned by Turner in his 'Names of Herbes' (1548), and in his
'Libellus' (1538), where there is a long disquisition concerning it. It
may be _Narcissus poeticus_, L., as Mr. B. D. Jackson supposes in his
reprint of the 'Libellus' or possibly _N. biflorus_, L."--Note by Mr.
J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E249] "Lillium cum vallium," the "Lily of the Valley," in Lyte
_Lyllie Conuall_, and also termed _May Blossoms, May Lyllies_, and
_Lyryconfancy_.
[E250] "Nigella Romana." The _Nigella Damascena_, Linn., a favourite
old-fashioned garden annual, still to be met with in gardens under the
names of "Love-in-a-mist," or "Devil-in-a-bush."
[E251] "Pansy," or Paunce, Fr. _pensée_, thought. According to Dr.
Johnson the name is derived from Lat. _panacea_, but there is no
evidence of the plant ever having been so called, or having been
regarded as a panacea. It has received more popular names perhaps
than any other plant, both in our own and in foreign languages. The
following are some of the quaint titles given to it: "Cull me to you,"
or "Cuddle me to you," "Love and Idle," "Live in Idleness," "Love in
Idleness" (originally "Love in idle," _i.e._ in vain); "Love in idle
Pances," "Tittle my fancy," "Kiss me, ere I rise," "Jump up and kiss
me," "Kiss me at the garden gate," "Pink of my John," "Herb Trinity,"
and "Three faces under one hood," from the three colours combined in
one flower. It was also called "Hearts-ease," and "Flame flower" (M.
Lat. _Viola flammea_).
_Heartsease_, a term meaning "_a cordial_," as in Sir W. Scott's
Antiquary, ch. xi., "Buy a dram to be eilding and claise, and a supper
and _hearts-ease_ into the bargain," given to certain plants supposed
to be cardiac: at present [applied] to the _pansy_ alone, but by Lyte,
Bulleyn, and W. Turner, to the _Wallflower_ equally.--Dr. R. A. Prior's
Popular Names of British Plants, which see for an account of the origin
of the name.
[E252] "Sops-in-Wine," the Clove Gilliflower, _Dianthus caryophyllus_,
L., so called from the flowers being used to flavour wine or ale. Cf.
Chaucer's Rime of Sir Thopas, B. 1950:
"Ther springen herbes grete and smale,
The lycorys and cetewale,
And many a clowe gilofre,
And notemuge to putte in ale,
Whether it be moyste or stale."
"Bring Coronations and _Sops in wine_ worne of Paramoures."
---Spenser, Shep. Cal. April.
"Garlands of Roses and _Sopps in Wine_."--Ibid. May. E. K., in his
Glossary, says: "_Sops in Wine_, a flowre in colour much like a
_coronation_ (carnation), but differing in smel and quantitye."
[E253] "Sweete Williams,"from Fr. _œillet_, Lat. _ocellus_, a
little eye, corrupted to _Willy_, and thence to _William_, "in
reference, perhaps, to a popular ballad, 'Fair Margaret and Sweet
William,' [printed in Ritson's Early Songs and Ballads, ed. Hazlitt,
1877] a name assigned by W. Bulleyn (f. 48) to the Wallflower, but by
later herbalists and modern gardeners, as here, to a species of pink,
_Dianthus barbatus_, Linn. According to an article in the Quarterly
Review (No. 227), it formerly bore the name of 'Sweet Saint William';
but the writer gives no reference, and probably had no authority for
saying so."--Dr. R. A. Prior, pp. 228 and 250.
[E254] "Sweete Johns." Apparently a variety of Sweet William. See
Parkinson's "Paradisus," pp. 319, 321, for descriptions and figures:
"The chiefe differences betweene them are, that [Sweet Williams] have
broader, and darker greene leaues, somewhat brownish, especially
towards the points, and that the flowers stand thicker and closer,
and more in number together, in the head or tuft."--Note by Mr. J.
Britten,, F.L.S.
[E255] "Star of Jerusalem." This is usually _Tragopogon pratensis_,
L., as in Gerard, p. 736, but some other plant is likely to be meant
here.--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E256] "Tuft gilleflowers." Probably some low-growing _Dianthus_,
such as that figured as "Matted Pinkes" by Parkinson (Paradisus, p.
315).--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E257] "Veluet flowers," according to Dr. Prior, the
"love-lies-bleeding," _Amaranthus caudatus_, Linn., from its crimson
velvety tassels; according to Lyte, the same as the Flower Gentle, or
Floramor, Fr. _passevelours, A. tricolor_, Linn.
[E258] "Eyebright." "Divers Authours write that goldfinches, linnets,
and some other Birds make use of this Herb for the repairing of their
own and their young ones sight."--Coles, "Adam in Eden," 1657, p. 46.
It is the "Euphrasy" of Milton, P. L. xi. 414. A similar story is told
of the Hawk-weed. See Pliny (lib. xx. c. 7).
[E259] "Fumetorie," Fr. _fume terre_, Lat. _fumus terræ_, earth-smoke,
it being believed to be produced without seed from vapours arising
from the earth, as stated by Platearius: "Dicitur _fumus terræ_, quod
generatur a quadam fumositate grossâ, a terrâ resolutâ, et circa
superficiem terræ adherente." Pliny (lib. xxv. c. 13) says that it
takes its name from causing the eyes to water when applied to them, as
smoke does;
"Take youre laxatives
Of lauriol, centaure, and _fumytere_."
--Chaucer, Nonnes Prestes Tale, 143.
See Burton's Anat. of Melancholy, pp. 432-3 and 438, ed. 1845.
[E260] "Woodrofe," spelt according to an old distich thus:
"Double U, double O, double D, E,
R, O, double U, double F, E."
It derives its name originally from the Fr. _roue_ = a wheel, dimin.
_rouelle_, the leaves being set on the stems so as to resemble the
large _rowels_ of ancient spurs.
[E261] "Archangel." This is _Archangelica officinalis_, the stalks of
which "were formerly blanched and eaten as Celeri.... The gardeners
near London, who have ditches of water running through their gardens,
propagate great quantities of this plant, for which they have a
great demand from the confectioners, who make a sweetmeat with the
tender stalks of it cut in May."--Martyn's ed. of Miller's Gardener's
Dictionary. It is still sometimes grown in gardens for use in the
above-mentioned manner. According to Cogan (Haven of Health, p. 71), it
will cure the bite of a mad dog.
[E262] According to Cogan "Cummin" was extensively used for washing
the face, it having the effect, if not used too often, of making the
complexion clear; if used to excess, it caused paleness. He continues,
"In Matthiolus (lib. 3, cap. 60) I reade a practise to be wrought with
_Cummine_ seedes, and (as I thinke) hath been vsed in time past of
Monkes and Friers. They that counterfait holinesse and leannesse of
bodie, doe often vse Cummine seedes in their meates, and be perfumed
therewith."--Haven of Health, p. 47.
[E263] "Detanie." Dittany (_Origanum onites_, Linn.) was commonly
cultivated in gardens at this period. Gerard, p. 795, says it is "a hot
and sharpe hearbe," and speaks of it as biting the tongue.
[E264] Gromell, Grummel, or Gray myle, as Turner says it should be
written, from _granum solis_ and _milium solis_ together. "That is al
one," says the Grete Herbal, "_granum solis_ and _milium solis_." The
common _gromwell_ or gray millet, _Lithospermum officinale_, Linn.,
was formerly esteemed as a remedy for the stone and other diseases.
In a treatise on the virtues of plants, written in the 15th century,
Roy. MS. 18 A. vi. f. 766, the following description is given: "_Granum
solis_ ys an herbe þat me clepyþ _gromel_, or lyþewale: thys herbe haþ
leuys þat be euelong, and a lytyl white flour, and he haþ whyte seede
ischape as a ston that me clepyþ margery perl." Cotgrave gives "Gremil,
grenil, the hearb _gromill, grummell_, or _graymill_, peare-plant,
lichewall." The word is derived by Skinner "_a granis sc. lapideis, quæ
pro seminibus habet, q.d. granile._"--Way, in Prompt. Parv. "Grumelle,
_milium, gramen solis_."--Catholicon Anglicum.
[E265] "Louage," spelt in Prompt. Parv. and in Holland's Trans. of
Pliny, _love-ache_, as though it were love-parsley. French _levesche_,
A.S. _lufestice, Levisticum officinale_, Koch.
[E266] "Mandrake." Matthioli (lib. iv. c. 61) tells us that Italian
ladies in his own time had been known to pay as much as 25 and 30
ducats for one of the artificial mandrakes (common white bryony) of
itinerant quacks, and describes the process of their manufacture.
They were supposed to remove sterility; hence Rachel's anxiety to
obtain them (Genesis xxx. 14). There were numerous other superstitions
regarding this plant; amongst others it was said to shriek when torn
up. See Gerard's Herbal, 1597, p. 280, and Peacock's Glossary of
Manley, etc., E. D. Soc. Lupton (Book of Notable Things, iii. 39) gives
instructions for the manufacture of Mandrakes from bryony roots. The
true Mandrake is _Atropa Mandragora_, Linn.
[E267] Mogwort. "Mugwort, a name that corresponds in meaning with its
synonym _wyrmwyrt_, wormwood, from O.E. _mough, moghe_, or _moughte_, a
maggot or moth.
'And wormes and _moghes_ on þe same manere
Sal þat day be in wittenes broght;'
--Hampole, Pricke of Conscience, l. 5572;
and Wycliffe (Matt. vi. 20):
'Where neþer ruste ne _moughte_ destruyeþ.'
The name was given to this plant from its having been recommended by
Dioscorides to ward off the attacks of these insects. 'Mogwort, al on
as seyn some, modirwort: lewed folk þat in manye wordes conne no rygt
sownynge, but ofte shortyn wordys, and changyn lettrys and silablys,
þey corruptyn þe _o_ into _u_, and _d_ into _g_, and syncopyn _i_,
smytyn awey _i_ and _r_, and seyn mugwort.'--MS. Arundel, 42, f. 35. It
is unnecessary to have recourse to this singular process. The plant was
known both as a _moth-wort_ and as a _mother-wort_, but while it was
used almost exclusively as a _mother-wort_, it still retained, at the
same time, the name of _mugwort_, a synonym of _moth-wort_. In Ælfric's
glossary it is called _matrum herba_--Dr. R. A. Prior. See Brand's Pop.
Antiq. for an account of the superstitious custom of seeking under the
root of this plant on Midsummer-eve for a coal, to serve as a talisman
against many disasters.
[E268] "Rew." Shakspere, Hamlet, iv. 5. 181: "There's rue for you; and
here's some for me: we may call it herb-grace o' Sundays." And Winter's
Tale, iv. 4. 74:
"For you there's rosemary and rue; these keep
Seeming and savour all the winter long:
Grace and remembrance be to you both."
Some suppose it to have been called "herb of grace" on account of the
many excellent properties it was held to possess, being a specific
against poison, the bites of venomous creatures, etc.; but probably it
was so called because "rue" means "repent." Cf. also Richard II. Act
iii. sc. 4. 105:
"Here in this place
I'll set a bank of _rue_, sour herb of grace."
[E269] "Bots." "Pease an beanes are as danke here as a dog, and this is
the next way to give poor jades the _bottes_."--Shakspere King Henry
IV. Act ii. sc. 1. "Begnawne with _bots_."--Taming of Shrew, Act iii.
sc. 2.
"Sauin." "It is often put into horses' drenches, to helpe to cure them
of the bots, and other diseases."--Parkinson, Paradisus, p. 607.
[E270] "Stitchwort," spelt _Stich-wurt_ in Mayer and Wright, Nat.
Antiquities, 1857, and given from a thirteenth century MS. as the
translation of "Valeriane." Supposed to possess the power of curing
a pain or _stitch_ in the sides.--See Gerard's Herbal, 1597, p. 43.
_Stellaria Holostea_, Linn.
[E271] "Woodbine," not a _bine_ that _grows in woods_, but a creeper
that binds or entwines trees, the honeysuckle. A.S. _wudu-winde_ and
_wudu-bind_, from _wudu_ = a tree, and _windan, bindan_ = to entwine.
In Shakspere (Mids. Night Dr. Act iv. sc. 1) it seems to mean the
bittersweet:
"So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
Gently entwist."
[E272] "Gregorie." "This day (12th March) seems to have been much used
as a date for agricultural observances: cf. 37. 3. In connexion with
this it is worth while to note the Suabian saying, 'Säe Erbsen Gregori'
(sow cabbage on St. Gregory's Day). See Swainson's Weather Folklore, p.
168."--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E273] "Mastiues and Mungrels." Although the influence of a very
patriotic sumptuary tax has diminished the number of dogs, we have
still 'thousands too manie.' [This may with truth be said even still.]
However, as Lent now makes little difference in the mode of living,
which it certainly did in the earlier period of the Reformation, our
dogs are not driven by our meagre fare to prey on the lambs; and
therefore need not be particularly watched on this account.--M. Mastif
is derived from O. Fr. _mestif_ = a mongrel (Cotgrave). In the Craven
dialect a great dog is still called a _masty_. See note E35.
[E274] By "hooke or by crooke" occurs in Spenser, Faery Queene, Bk. v.
Canto 2, stanza 27; also in Heywood's Works, 1562, reprint 1867, p. 35.
[E275] No trees appear preferable to willows for fencing hop grounds;
and none are said to be worse than elms, as they attract mildews.--M.
[E276] "What better to skilfull," etc., that is, what can be more
profitable to the experienced farmer than to know when to be bold, that
is, to venture the early sowing of barley?
[E277] The Mayweed (_Anthemis cotula_) is common in corn-fields and
hedgerows. "May-weed or stinking camomile."--T.R. "Resembling cammomil
but of a stinking savour and odious to bees." Coles' Dict. 1676.
[E278] Cockle or _Cokyl_ was used by Wycliffe and other old writers in
the sense of a weed generally, but in later works has been confined to
the _gith_ or _corn-pink_.
[E279] Our author's meaning is, sow barley, oats and pease above
furrows and harrow them in; while rye is best ploughed in with a
shallow furrow.
[E280] "Without cost," that is, on which no expense has been incurred.
[E281] Watering is necessary in dry seasons for what is fresh _set_ or
planted, but not for what is newly sown.
[E282] It is to be lamented, both on account of the health and the
finances of the poor, that they are so much attached, either to solid
food, or to watery infusions of tea. Herbs, pulse and roots might often
supersede more expensive articles of diet. Spoonmeat, in this part of
the island at least, is in no high request at this period, though it
appears to have been indispensable formerly.--M.
[E283] "There remaineth yet a third kinde of meats, which is neither
fish nor flesh, commonly called _white meats_, as egges, milk, butter,
cheese, which notwithstanding proceede and come of flesh, as egges from
the henne, and milk from the cowe. Yet because they are not plainely
flesh, they are permitted to be eaten upon the fish daies."--Cogan's
Haven of Health, ed. 1612, p. 149.
"But how soeuer this case standeth, _white meats_, as milke, butter
and cheese, which were neuer so deere as in my time, and woont to be
accounted of as one of the chiefe staies throughout the Iland, are now
reputed as foods appertinent onelie to the inferiour sort, whilest such
as are more wealthie, doo feed vpon the flesh of all kinds of cattell
accustomed to be eaten, all sorts of fish taken vpon our coasts and in
our fresh rivers, and such diuersitie of wild and tame foules as are
either bred in our Iland or brought ouer vnto vs from other countries
of the maine."--Harrison, Descript. of England, ed. Furnivall, Part
I. p. 144. _White meats_ in Lincoln now mean the flesh of lamb, veal,
rabbits, chickens, pheasants, etc.
[E284] "Count best the best cheape": "For it doth the buyer more credit
and service."--Ray. We still say "Cheap and nasty;" and in the Towneley
Mysteries, p. 102, there is the same sentiment:
"Men say lyght chepe
letherly for yeeldys,"
equivalent to our English proverb: "Light cheap, litter yield."
[E285] It is always advisable to pay carpenters their fair wages,
without any allowance of chips, which is a great temptation for them
to waste timber.--M. In hewing timber, if the workman hews square, the
seller of the timber loses all the gain of the _Wane edges_, which gain
in short is a cheat, although a very customary one.--T.R.
[E286] "Within these fortie yeeres we shall haue little great timber
growing aboue fortie yeeres old; for it is commonlie seene that those
yong _staddles_ which we leaue standing at one and twentie yeeres
fall, are vsuallie at the next sale cut downe without any danger of
the statute, and serue for fire bote, if it please the owner to burne
them."--Harrison, Part I. p. 345. "There is a Statute made, 35 Henry
the 8, and the 1 Eliz. for the presentation of timber trees, Oake,
Ash, Elme, Aspe, and Beech: and that 12 storers and _standils_ should
bee left standing at euery fall, vpon an acre."--Norden's Surveyor's
Dialogue, 1607, p. 213. On the decrease in woods, etc., in England,
see Harrison's Description of England (New Shakspere Soc. edit. F. J.
Furnivall, Part I. p. 344) and Norden's Surveyor's Dialogue, 1607, p.
214, in the latter of which one cause is stated to be the large number
of hammers and furnaces for the manufacture of iron, and the quantity
of charcoal used in the glass-houses; there being, as he says: "now
or lately in Sussex, neere 140 hammers and furnaces for iron, and in
it, and Surry adjoyning 3,400 glasse houses: the hammers and furnaces
spend, each of them, in every 24 houres 2, 3 or foure loades of
charrcoale."--p. 215. "There is a Law in Spaine, that he that cuts down
_one Tree_, shall plant _three_ for it."--A Treatise of Fruit Trees, R.
A. Austin, Oxford, 1657, p. 128.
[E287] "Leaue oxen abrode," etc. The Author of Tusser Redivivus is
supported in his reading of this line by the edition of 1597, which has
"leaue _not_ oxe abrode." The sense, however, may possibly be, "keep
oxen at a distance, for fear of injuring the young shoots." "_Springe_
or ympe that commeth out of the rote."--Huloet's Abcedarium, 1552.
"Keep from biting, treading underfoot, or damage of beasts ... whereby
mischief may be done to the _Springs_, during the time limited by the
statute for such kind of wood."--Brumby Lease, 1716, in Peacock's
Glossary, E. Dial. Soc.
[E288] "Meet with a bootie," etc., that is, as we say, find something
which was never lost.
[E289] Wanteth = is without, does not keep.
[E290] "Waine her to mee." Perhaps = waggon, that is, "drive, carry her
to me," but it is a forced expression.
[E291] "Such maister such man." Another form of the proverb is, "Trim,
Tram; like master, like man." "Tel maître, tel valet" (Fr.).
[E292] Compare with Tusser's description of the faults to be avoided in
the making of cheese the following extracts on the same subject:
"Now what cheese is well made or otherwise may partly be perceiued by
this old Latine verse:
Non nix, non Argos, Methusalem, Magdaleneve,
Esaus, non Lazarus, caseus ille bonus.
That is to say, Cheese should not be white as Snowe is, nor full of
eyes as Argos was, nor old as Methusalem was, nor full of whey or
weeping as Marie Magdalen was, nor rough as Esau was, nor full of spots
as Lazarus. Master Tusser in his Booke of husbandrie addeth other
properties also of Cheese well made, which who so listeth may read.
Of this sort for the most part is that which is made about Banbury
in Oxfordshire: for of all cheese (in my judgement) it is the best,
though some preferre Cheshire Cheese made about Nantwich: and other
also commend the Cheese of other countries: But Banbury Cheese shall
goe for my money: for therein (if it be of the best sort) you shall
neither tast the renet nor salt, which be two speciall properties of
good Cheese. Now who so is desirous to eate Cheese, must eate it after
other meat, and in little quantitie. A pennyweight, according to the
old saying, is enough."--Cogan's Haven of Health, ed. 1612, pp. 158-9.
Andrew Boorde, in his Dyetary already referred to, p. 266, mentions 5
kinds of cheese, namely: "grene chese, softe chese, harde chese and
spermyse. Besyde these iiij natures of chese, there is a chese called
a rewene chese, the whiche, yf it be well orderyd, doth passe all
other cheses, none excesse taken." ... "Chese that is good oughte not
be to harde nor to softe, but betwyxt both; it shuld not be towgh nor
brultell; it ought not to be swete, nor tarte, nor to salt, nor to
fresshe; it must be of good savour and taledge, nor full of iyes, nor
mytes, nor magottes."
"Yf a chees is drie,
Hit is a vyce, and so is many an eye
Yf it see with, that cometh yf sounyng brendde,
Or moche of salt, or lite of presse, it shende."
---Palladius on Husbondrie, E. E. Text Soc. ed. Lodge, p. 154.
With these extracts showing the essentials of good cheese, compare
the following description of Suffolk Cheese, locally termed _Bang and
Thump_, and made of milk several times skimmed:
"Unrivall'd stands thy county cheese, O Giles!
Whose very name alone engenders smiles;
Whose fame abroad by every tongue is spoke,
The well-known butt of many a flinty joke,
Its name derision and reproach pursue,
And strangers tell of 'three times skimm'd skye blue.'"
--Blomfield.
Its toughness has given rise to a number of local illustrations. In one
the cheese exclaims:
"Those that made me were uncivil,
For they made me harder than the devil;
Knives won't cut me; fire won't sweat me;
Dogs bark at me, but can't eat me."
"Hunger will break through stone walls, or anything except Suffolk
cheese," is a proverb from Ray. Mowbray says "it is only fit to be cut
up for gate latches, a use to which it is often applied." Other writers
represent it as most suitable for making wheels for wheelbarrows.
[E293] "Argusses eies." The mythical Argus, surnamed Panoptes (the
All-seer), had a hundred eyes; he was placed by Juno to guard Io, and
at his death his eyes were transplanted to the peacock's tail.
[E294] To fleet or skim the cream is a verb still in use in
East Anglia, and the utensil used for the purpose is termed a
_fleeting-dish_. "I flete mylke, take away the creame that lyeth above
it whan it hath rested."--Palsgr. "_Esburrer_, to fleet the creame
potte; _laict esburré_, fleeted milk; _maigne_, fleeted milke or
whaye."--Hollyband's Treasurie. "Ye _floted_ too nie" = you skimmed off
too much of the cream.
[E295] If cheeses are full of eyes, it is a proof that the curd was not
properly worked.
[E296] Hoven cheese is occasioned by negligence in breaking the curd;
and therefore Cisley deserves to be driven to _creeks_, or holes and
corners, for her idleness and inattention.--M.
[E297] Tough or leathery cheese may arise from its being set too hot,
or not worked up, and the curd broken in proper time.--M.
[E298] Various causes may bring on corruption in cheese, such as the
use of beastings, or milk immediately after calving, moisture, bruises
and such like.
[E299] Hairs in cheese can only arise from inexcusable carelessness, or
from Cisley's combing and decking her hair in the dairy.
[E300] Magget the py = the magpie, a pun on the word magget, in its two
meanings of 1. a maggot, 2. a magpie, commonly called in Prov. Eng.
_magot-pie, maggoty-pie_, from _mag, maggot = Meg, Maggie = Margery,
Margaret_, and _pie_; Fr. _margot_, old dimin. of _Marguerite_,
and common name of the magpie. The line, therefore, reads, "If
maggots be crawling in the cheese, fetch magget the py." "_Pie_,
meggatapie."--Cotgrave. Cf. Shakspere, Macbeth, Act iii. sc. 4, 125.
[E301] "Cisley, in running after the Bishop in passing, as was the
practice in former times, in order to obtain his blessing, might
accidentally leave her milk on the fire; and on her return, finding
it burnt to the pan, might probably curse the prelate for her mishap,
which conduct deserved correction, or a left-handed blessing from her
mistress." So Dr. Mavor. Mr. Skeat remarks in reference to it: "That
stupid story makes me cross; it is such an evident invention, and no
soul has ever adduced the faintest proof of any such practice. The
allusion is far less circuitous, viz. to the bishops who burnt people
for heresy. That they did so is too notorious." The following extract
appears strongly to bear out Mr. Skeat's view: "When a thynge speadeth
not well we borowe speach and say '_the byshope hath blessed it_,'
because that nothynge speadeth well that they medyll withall. If the
podech be burned to, or the meate over rosted, we say '_the byshope has
put his fote in the potte_,' or '_the byshope hath played the coke_,'
because the byshopes burn who they lust, and whosoever displeaseth
them."--Quotation from Tyndale's Obedyence of a Chrystene Man, 1528, p.
166, in Brockett, North Country Glossary, 1825, page 16. If we consider
that these verses were written while the memory of the numbers who had
suffered death at the stake for their religion was still fresh in the
minds of the people, Mr. Skeat's view, borne out, as it is, by the
foregoing extract, certainly appears the more reasonable and probable.
[E302] "Here reede": we may take this as meaning either "here read,"
or, adopting the older meaning of the word _reede_ (A.S. _ræd_ =
advice, warning), as "hear my advice or warning."
[E303] "Take nothing to halues," that is, do nothing by halves.
[E304] "Tell fagot and billet," etc.; count your faggots and fire-wood,
to prevent the boys and girls from pilfering it, so that when you come
to fetch it you find "a quarter be gone." So also in the next stanza,
watch the coal men filling the sacks, lest you should get short weight;
and, when the coals are delivered, see the sacks opened, for fear the
coal dealer and the carman should be 'two in a pack,' or 'harp on one
string,' and between them you be defrauded.
[E305] "Philip and Jacob," that is, St. Philip and St. James' Day, May
1st. "When flocks were more uniform as to breed and management, lambs
used to be separated from their dams on this day, for the purpose of
tithing as well as milking."--M. "Requiem æternam," a portion of the
Roman Catholic Service for the dead, hence "least _requiem æternam_ in
winter they sing" = lest they die in the winter from not having been
allowed to become sufficiently strong before being taken from their
dams, and thus being incapable of enduring the severity of the weather.
[E306] "Barberlie handled," that is, "_secundum artem_, as a barber
surgeon would do, by first cutting away extraneous substances, and
then rubbing the part with dust."--M. Tusser Redivivus calls the
lumps of dirt and worms which gather on the wool under a sheep's tail
"_treddles_."
[E307] During the summer season, hollow and decayed pollards in
particular, or woodsere, cannot be lopped without danger. Ivy, however,
is to be removed; or it will, by the closeness of its embraces, prevent
trees from _addling_, that is, growing or increasing in size.--M.
[E308] The Thrasher serves the Cattle with fresh Straw, the Hogs with
Risk (offal, corn and weeds, and short knotty straw).--T.R. (May).
[E309] "A weede hooke, a crotch, and a gloue." Fitzherbert (Boke of
Husbandry, 1586) enumerates, as "ye chyef instrumentes for weeding,
a paier of tonges made of wood and in the farther end it is nicked
to hold ye wede faster ... yf it be drye wether then must ye have a
_wedying hoke_ with a socket set upon a lytle staffe a yard longe. And
this hoke wolde be wel steled and grounde sharpe bothe behynde and
before. And in his other hande he hath a _forked stycke_ a yarde long."
The whole account of weeding in the "Boke" is very quaint. In former
days thistles were gathered from the corn for the feeding of cattle,
and the left hand of the reaper was guarded with a leathern glove:
there is an entry among the expenses of the Priory of Holy Island for
1344-5 of "gloves for 14 servants when they gathered the tythe corn,
2_s._ 8_d._" See Johnston's "Botany of the Eastern Borders."--Note by
Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E310] "The May weed doth burn" (_Anthemis cotula_, L.). The juice of
this plant is possessed of an acrid blistering property which renders
it extremely noxious to reapers. The irritating effects are produced in
a still greater degree by the seed when ripe, and are mostly manifested
in the lower extremities, from the close adhesion of the seeds by
their rough surface, aided by the friction of the shoe, causing first
abrasion, then active inflammation, and even ulceration. Dr. Bromfield
(Flora Vectensis) says: "I have been repeatedly assured by the
peasantry that they have known men incapacitated for work, and laid up,
from the injurious operation of this noxious weed, for days together in
harvest time."
[E311] "The thistle doth fret." Fitzherbert (Boke of Husbandry) says:
"The thystell is an yll wede rough and sharpe to handle, and _freateth
away the cornes_ nyghe it."
[E312] "The fitches pul downward." The hairy tare, _Vicia hirsuta_, L.
Fitch = vetch.
[E313] "The cockle," _Lychnis Githago_, L. "_Cockole_ hath a large smal
[_sic_] leafe and wyll beare v or vi floures purple colloure as brode
as a grote, and the sede is rounde and blacke."--Fitzherbert, Boke of
Husbandry.
[E314] "Boddle." The corn marigold, _Chrysanthemum segetum_, L., more
usually called boodle or buddle in the East of England; in Kent, yellow
bottle; in Scotland, gools, gules, or goolds, in allusion to the colour
of the flower. This is a very noxious weed, the non-extirpation of
which in Scotland was formerly a punishable offence: certain persons
(hence called "gool-riders") were appointed to ride through the fields
on a certain day, and impose a fine of three shillings and fourpence,
or a wether sheep, for every stalk of the plant found growing in the
corn. The custom is of great antiquity, and exists in a modified form
at the present day, the fine being reduced to a penny. Linnæus states
that a similar law exists in Denmark.--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E315] Buckwheat, Dutch _boekweit_, Ger. _buckwaitzen_, from the
resemblance of its triangular seeds to beech-nuts, a name adopted with
its culture from the Dutch.--It is a tender plant, and must be sown
late.--M. It is also very proper to sow it (bucke) before wheat, the
ground is made clean and fine by it, and it sufficing itself with a
Froth leaves the solid Strength for the Wheat.--T.R. (May). _Polygonum
Fagopyrum_, Linn.
[E316] "Brank" = buckwheat, from a Latin word, _brance_, that occurs
in Pliny lib. xviii. cap. 7, where it seems rather to mean a barley.
"Galliæ quoque suum genus farris dedere, quod illic _brance_ vocant,
apud nos sandalam, nitidissimi grani." The word will be identical
with _blanc_, white, Port. _branco_, and equivalent to _wheat_, which
properly means "white."--Popular Names of British Plants, Dr. R. A.
Prior, 1870, p. 28. Pancakes are made of it in Holland.--T.R.
[E317] Pidgeons, Rooks, and other Vermine, about that time begin to be
scanted, and will certainly find them [peas] out, be they in never so
by a Corner.--T.R. (May).
[E318] Fimble, or Female Hemp, so called, I suppose, because it falls
to the Female's share to _tew-taw_ it, that is, to dress it and to spin
it, etc. The Fimble Hemp is that which is ripe soonest and fittest for
spinning, and is not worth above half as much as the _Carle_ with its
seed.--T.R. "The male is called _Charle Hempe_, and _Winter Hempe_;
the Female _Barren Hempe_ and _Sommer Hempe_."--Gerard's Herball, p.
572. "Hemp was much cultivated here until the end of the great war with
France. The _Carl_ or male hemp was used for ropes, sackcloth, and
other coarse manufactures: the _fimble_, or female hemp, was applied
to making sheets and other domestic purposes."--Peacock's Gloss. of
Manley, etc., E. D. Soc.
It is curious that the Karl or male hemp should be in reality the
female plant, but other authors use the names in the same way. "The
femell hempe ... beareth no sede."--Fitzherbert, "Boke of Husbandry."
See also 55. 8. Gerard says the female hemp is "barren and without
seede, contrarie to the nature of that sexe."--Note by Mr. J. Britten,
F.L.S.
[E319] The fact of the Hop being one of the plants which twine from
left to right had thus been observed as early as Tusser's time.--Note
by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E320] The tine tare ["a tare that _tines_ or encloses and imprisons
other plants, _Vicia hirsuta_."--Prior] is now seldom attempted to be
raked out, for fear of greater mischief from the practice than from its
neglect. The safest way is certainly to cut the tine near the root, but
the operation is extremely tedious.--M.
[E321] "The Fawy riseth in Fawy moore in a verie _quaue mire_, on the
side of an hill."--Harrison, ed. 1587, Bk. i. c. 12.
Cf. "The wal wagged and clef, and al the worlde _quaved_."
--Piers Plowman, ed. Skeat, B Text, Passus xviii. 61.
"Quave of a myre (quaue as of a myre), _Labina_. Quavyn, as myre,
_Tremo_."--Prompt. Parv. Horman, in his chapter _de re edificatoriâ_,
observes that "a _quauery_ or a maris and unstable foundation must
be holpe with great pylys of alder rammed downe, and with a frame
of tymbre called a crossaundre (_fistucâ_)." In Caxton's Mirrour of
the World, Part II. c. 22, it is said, "understande ye how the erthe
quaueth and shaketh, that somme peple calle an erthe quaue, by cause
they fele the erthe meue and quaue vnder their feet." "Quaue myre,
_foundriere crouliere_."--Palsgrave. Forby gives Quavery-mavery =
undecided, hesitating.--Way, Note in Prompt. Parv., _s.v._ Quave.
[E322] The meaning is, make your dunghill on the headland, especially
where shaded with trees and bushes, as they will prevent the moisture
from exhaling.--M.
"I see in some meddowes _gaully_ places where little or no grasse at
al groweth, by reason (as I take it) of the too long standing of the
water, for such places are commonly low, where the water standeth,
not hauing vent to passe away, and therefore meanes must be first
made for the evacuation of the water: for the continual standing of
the water consumeth the grasse, and makes the place bare, and sinketh
it. In such a place, therefore, sow in the Spring-time some hay-seed,
especially the seed of the claver grasse, [clover] or the grasse
hony-suckle [trefoil], and other seeds that fall out of the finest and
purest hay: and in the sowing of it, mingle with it some good earth;
but sow not the hony-suckle grasse in too moist a ground, for it liketh
it not."--Norden's Surveyor's Dialogue, 1607, pp. 201-2. Gauls are void
spaces in Coppices which serve for nothing but to entice the Cattel
into it, to its great Damage.--T.R.
[E323] If the land is overstocked in summer, you may, perhaps, be
obliged to assist your cattle to rise in winter; or, in other words,
"to lift at their tails."--M. Cf. 21. 14.
[E324] It appears to have been the custom formerly to allow, in warm
weather, sleep for an hour or two. In Norfolk we are told the practice
is not quite obsolete on churning days when the mistress and maids get
up early; and likewise among the ploughmen, where two journies a day
are performed with their teams, and an interval allowed for rest.--M.
Compare the expression in the Paston Letters, i. 390, "Writan in my
slepyng tyme at after none, on Wytsonday."
[E325] "Patch." Cf. Shakspere, Mid. Night's Dr., Act iii. sc. 2; and
Merchant of Venice, Act ii. sc. 5.
[E326] "Growthed" = grout-hed = thick head, fat head. Cf. _growtnoul_ =
a blockhead. "_Growte nowle_ come to the King."--Promos and Cassandra,
p. 81.
[E327] Stilling, or distilling, may be a "pretty feat," but we doubt
if it is very profitable, and if it does not furnish a temptation to
dram-drinking, under the mask of simple and medicinal _waters_.--M.
[E328] See note E69.
[E329] "Swinge brembles and brakes," this is, cut down with a sweeping
instrument somewhat resembling a scythe.
[E330] "Sheep-shearing takes place only once, viz. in the month of
June; the heaviest wethers weigh sixty pounds, others from forty to
fifty pounds: they bear at the most not more than six, others four or
five pounds of wool; one of the best wethers (notwithstanding that
they are very abundant) sells for about twenty shillings, that is, ten
French francs or five thalers; the inferior sort about ten shillings,
or five francs; and the worst about six or eight English shillings.
The skin of the best wether and sheep is worth about twelve pence,
that is, four and a half German batzen; the worst about eight pence or
three batzen; a pound of wool about twelve pence, or four and a half
batzen."--Rathgeb, 1602, Rye, p. 51 (quoted in Harrison's Description
of England, ed. Furnivall, Part I. p. lxxxiii). "Running Water is best,
... but then it is oft-times very sheer and cold."--T.R. (June).
[E331] "Grote." "In this yere [1349] the kynge caused to be coyned
grotes and half grotes, the whiche lacked of the weight of his former
coyne, ii s. vi d. in a li [_libra_, pound] Troy."--Fabyan, p. 461. The
_groat_ was only equal to about three and a half silver pennies instead
of four.
[E332] "The Pie will discharge thee," etc., that is, the magpie will
save you the trouble, etc., alluding to birds eating vermin on sheep's
backs.
[E333] "Ouercome" = overtake, or keep up with; don't mow more than you
can easily make, not too much at once, lest part of it be spoiled for
want of hands.
[E334] "Cock apace." Cf. Piers Plowman, C. Text, Passus vi. 12, 13 (ed.
Skeat).
"Canstow seruen, he seide, oþer syngen in a churche,
Oþer _coke for my cokers_, oþer to þe cart picche?"
_i.e._ put hay into cocks for my harvest men. Mr. Skeat quotes in
his note to this passage: "Bee it also prouided, that this act, nor
anything therein contained, doe in any wise extende to any _cockers_
or haruest folkes that trauaile into anie countrie of this realme for
haruest worke, either corne haruest, or hay haruest, if they doe worke
and labour accordingly."--Rastall, Statutes; Vagabonds, etc., p. 474.
[E335] To employ your labourers in ploughing, or in performing other
parts of husbandry, till the dew is off the grass, is unquestionably a
saving of time, and essentially forwards the business of the farm.--M.
[E336] He who is constantly borrowing tools and other things which he
ought to have of his own, lays himself under obligation to the lender,
who expects twice as much in return.
[E337] "Woodsere" here means the proper season for felling wood.
[E338] "Fieing." "Feigh, Fey, vb. to clean out a drain, gutter or
cesspool. 'Paid to John Lavghton in haruest for _feighinge_ the milne
becke.'--Kirton in Lindsey Ch. Acc. 1582. George Todd's _feyin'_ out
the sink hole."--Peacock's Glossary, E. Dial. Soc. 1877. To _fey_ a
ditch or pond is to empty and clean it; and the mud taken from such
places, if mixed with lime or chalk, forms an excellent compost for
pasture grounds.--M. Cf. Icel. _fægja_, to cleanse, whence our word is
derived.
[E339] "Of late yeares also we haue found and taken vp a great trade
in planting of _hops_, whereof our moorie hitherto and vnprofitable
grounds doo yeeld such plentie and increase that there are few farmers
or occupiers in the countrie, which haue not gardens and hops growing
of their owne, and those farre better than doo come from Flanders
vnto vs. Certes the corruptions vsed by the Flemings, and forgerie
dailie practised in this kind of ware, gaue vs occasion to plant them
here at home; so that now we may spare and send manie ouer vnto them.
And this I know by experience that some one man by conuersion of his
moorie grounds into hopyards, wherof before he had no commoditie, dooth
raise yearelie by so little as twelue acres in compasse two hundred
markes; all charges borne toward the maintenance of his familie. Which
Industrie God continue! Though some secret freends of Flemings let not
to exclaime against this commoditie, as a spoile of wood, by reason
of the poles, which neuerthelesse after three yeares doo also come to
the fire, and spare their other fewell."--Harrison, Descript. of Eng.,
1587, p. 206. "Lowe and spungie grounds trenched is good for hopps,
as Suffolke, Essex, and Surrie, and other places doe find to their
profit."--Norden, p. 206. Evelyn, Sylva, pp. 201, 469, ed. Hunter,
asserts that there was a petition against them temp. Henry VI., but no
record of it appears on the rolls of Parliament. Brewing with hops was
not introduced here till the reign of King Henry VIII. (Stow, Hist. p.
1038.) _Bere_, however, is mentioned in 1504. (Leland, Coll. vi. p.
30, and see Dr. Percy on Northumberland Book, p. 414.)--Pegge's Forme
of Cury, ed. 1780, p. xxiii. See a long note in Prompt. Parv., _s.v._
Hoppe; and also "Pharmacographia," p. 496.
[E340] For wanting at will = for fear of having none when you really
want it.
[E341] Hay for neat cattle may be made with less labour, and more
expeditiously than for horses; because, if it is a little mow burnt, it
will not be the less acceptable to them; and besides, the fermentation
it undergoes, if not carried too far, has a natural tendency to mellow
coarse grass.--M.
[E342] _Avise auouse_ is French jargon for _take precautions_. Ill-made
hay is apt to take fire; if much wetted with rain, to become mouldy.
Hard and fine hay is best for horses; soft and coarse hay will be more
acceptable to cattle; while short hay is coveted by sheep.--M.
[E343] Thry fallowing, or the third plowing, should be performed
pretty early in the summer, in order that the ground may acquire
sufficient hardness to resist the seeds of thistles and other weeds,
even at the risk of requiring another stirring.--M.
[E344] This can only refer to garden beans, but the practice is now
obsolete.
[E345] See note E318.
[E346] "Wormwood, a word corrupted from A.S. _wermod_, Ger. _wermuth_,
O.S. _weremede_, words which seem to be compounded with Ger. _wehren_,
A.S. _werian_ = to keep off, and _mod_ or _made_ = maggot, but which,
by an accidental coincidence of sound, have been understood as though
the first syllable were _worm_. L. Diefenbach would prefer to derive
it from a Celtic root that means "bitter," Welsh _chwerw_, Cornish
_wherow_. Be its origin what it may, it was understood in the Middle
Ages as meaning a herb obnoxious to maggots, and used to preserve
things from them, and was also given as an anthelmintic or worm
medicine. _Artemisia Absinthium_, L."--Dr. R. A. Prior, Pop. Names
of Brit. Plants. "Two sorts of _Wormewood_ are well knowen of many,
that is, our common Wormewood, and that which is called _Ponticum_,
now sowen in many gardens, and commonly called French-wormewood. And
while it is yong, it is eaten in Salats with other herbes, to the great
commoditie of the stomacke and Liuer. For it strengthneth a weake
stomacke, and openeth the Liuer and Splene. For which purpose there is
to be had in the Stilliard at London a kind of wine named Worme-wood
wine, which I would wish to be much used of all such Students as be
weake of stomacke. They may easily haue a rundlet of three or foure
gallons or lesse, which they may draw within their owne chambers as
need requireth. I was woont when appetite failed to steepe a branch
or two of common Wormewood in halfe a pint of good white wine, close
couered in some pot all night, and in the morning to straine it through
a clean linnen cloth, and put in a little sugar and warme it, and so
drinke it. Or sometime to burne a little quantitie of wine with sugar,
and a branch or two of Wormewood put into it. Wherein I have found many
times marvellous commoditie, and who so shall vse it now and then, shal
be sure of a good stomacke to meat, and be free from wormes."--Cogan's
Haven of Health, p. 55. "_Wormwood_, centaury, pennyroyal, are likewise
magnified and much prescribed, especially in hypochondrian melancholy,
daily to be used, sod in whey."--Burton, Anat. of Melancholy, p. 432.
[E347] "As many doo more," _i.e._ as many others do. Cf. 63. 18.
[E348] There is a proverb: "One scabb'd sheep's enough to spoil a
flock."
[E349] In Lincolnshire corn affected by the smut is called _Parson
corn_, the reason assigned being that when tithes were paid in kind,
the sheaves that had the most smuts in them were always given to the
_parson_, if he could be seduced into taking them.--See Peacock's
Gloss. of Manley, etc., E. Dial. Soc. 1877.
[E350] _Mow-burn_ is occasioned by the Hay being stack'd too soon,
before its own juice is thoroughly dried, and by Norfolk people is
called the _Red Raw_; not such as is occasioned by stacking it when wet
with Rain, which is a nasty musty and stinks.--T.R.
[E351] Hentzner, p. 79 (quoted in Harrison's Description of England,
ed. F. J. Furnivall, p. lxxxiv), says: "As we were returning to our
inn (at Windsor, Sept. 14), we happened to meet some country people
celebrating their Harvest-home; their last load of corn they crown with
flowers, having besides an image richly dressed, by which, perhaps,
they would signify Ceres; this they keep moving about, while men and
women, men and maid servants, riding through the streets in the cart,
shout as loud as they can till they arrive at the barn."
[E352]
"Tis merie in hall,
When beards wag all."
This proverb is of great antiquity. It occurs in the Life of Alexander
(formerly, but erroneously, attributed to Adam Davie), written in 1312,
where the words are:
"Swithe mury hit is in halle,
When burdes wawen alle."
--Weber's Met. Rom.
It occurs also in Shakspere, 2 Henry IV. Act v. sc. 3, and is quoted in
the _Merie Tales of Skelton_, 1567. See also Ray's Proverbs.
[E353] "For Mihelmas spring," that is, "for fear of injuring the young
plants, etc., at Michaelmas."
[E354] In Harrison's Descript. of England, Part II. p. 50 _et
seq._, there is a long chapter on the cultivation and uses of Saffron
in England, from which I extract the following: "As the Saffron of
England, which Platina reckneth among spices, is the most excellent
of all other; for it giueth place neither to that of Cilicia, whereof
Solinus speaketh, neither to anie that commeth from Cilicia, where it
groweth upon the mount _Taurus, Tmolus, Italie, Ætolia, Sicilia_ or
_Licia_, in sweetnesse, tincture and continuance; so of that which is
to be had amongst us, the same that grows about Saffron Walden, somtime
called Waldenburg, in the edge of Essex, first of all planted there
in the time of Edward the Third, and that of Glocestershire and those
westerlie parts, which some thinke to be better than those of Walden,
surmounteth all the rest, and therefore beareth worthilie the higher
price, by sixpence or twelue pence most commonlie in the pound.... The
heads of saffron are raised in Julie, either with plough, raising or
tined hooke; and being scowred from their rosse or filth, and seuered
from such heads as are ingendred of them since the last setting, they
are interred againe in Julie and August by ranks or rowes, and being
couered with moulds, they rest in the earth, where they cast forth
little fillets and small roots like vnto a scallion, until September,
in the beginning of which moneth the ground is pared and all weeds and
grasse that groweth vpon the same remooved, to the intent that nothing
may annoie the floure when as his time dooth come to rise. These things
being thus ordered in the latter end of the aforesaid moneth [of
September], the floure beginneth to appeere of a whitish blew, fesse,
or skie colour, and in the end shewing itselfe in the owne kind, it
resembleth almost the _Leucotion_ of _Theophrast_, sauing that it is
longer, and hath in the middest thereof three chines verie red and
pleasant to behold. These floures are gathered in the morning before
the rising of the sunne, which otherwise would cause them to welke
or flitter. And the chines being picked from the floures, these are
throwne into the doong-hill; the other dried vpon little kelles couered
with streined canuasses vpon a soft fire; wherby and by the weight that
is laied vpon them, they are dried and pressed into cakes, and then
bagged vp for the benefit of their owners. In good yeeres we gather
foure score or an hundred pounds of wet saffron of an acre, which being
dried dooth yeeld twentie pounds of drie and more. Whereby, and sith
the price of saffron is commonlie about twentie shillings in monie, or
not so little, it is easie to see what benefit is reaped by an acre of
this commoditie.... For admit that the triple tillage of an acre dooth
cost 13 shillings foure pence before the saffron be set, the clodding
sixteene pence, the taking of euerie load of stones from the same foure
pence, the raising of euerie quarter of heads six pence, and so much
for cleansing of them, besides the doong which is woorth six pence the
load to be laid on the first yeere, for the setting three and twentie
shillings and foure pence, for the paring fiue shillings, six pence for
the picking of a pound wet, etc.; yea though he hire it readie set,
and paie ten pounds for the same, yet shall he susteine no damage, if
warme weather and open season doo happen at the gathering." Harrison
then describes fully the culture of saffron, and the adulterations and
tricks practised by the dealers, and afterwards describes the virtues
of it: "Our saffron (beside the manifold vse that it hath in the
kitchin and pastrie, also in our cakes at bridals, and thanksgivings of
women) is verie profitably mingled with those medicines which we take
for the diseases of the breast, of the lungs, of the liuer, and of the
bladder; it is good also for the stomach if you take it in meat, for
it comforteth the same, and maketh good digestion: being sodden also
in wine, it not onelie keepeth a man from dronkennesse, but incorageth
also unto procreation of issue. If you drinke it in sweet wine, it
inlargeth the breath, and is good for those that are troubled with
the tisike and shortnesse of the wind: mingled with the milke of a
woman, and laied vpon the eies, it staieth such humors as descend into
the same, and taketh away the red wheales and pearles that oft grow
about them: it killeth moths if it be sowed in paper bags verie thin,
and laid vp in presses among tapistrie or apparrell: also it is verie
profitable laid vnto all inflammations, painefull aposthumes, and the
shingles, and doth no small ease vnto deafnes.... Three drams thereof
taken at once, which is about the weight of one shilling nine pence
halfe penie, is deadlie poison."
[E355] "The two S. Maries daies," _i.e._ July 22nd, St. Mary
Magdalene's Day, and August 15th, the feast of the Assumption of the
Virgin Mary.--M. Mr. Skeat suggests that the days meant are August 15th
and September 8th, the Nativity of the Virgin Mary.
There is no doubt Mr. Skeat is right; compare "Centory must be gotten
betweene our Lady dayes."--Langham's Garden of Health. The date is not
uncommon in Herbals.--Note by Mr. J. Britten, F.L.S.
[E356] Mustard-seed is very apt to shed, and therefore should be
gathered before it becomes too ripe. After dressing it is to be laid in
a soller or garret. "Soller, a lofte, _garnier_."--Palsgrave. "Garytte,
hay solere."--Prompt. Parv.
[E357] Though all the editions which I have seen read as printed in the
text, it is evident that Tusser meant exactly the opposite, viz.:
"By day will deceiue thee, etc.
By great will dispatch, etc."
Men who take work by the great, that is, by the job or contract, are,
as experience tells us, naturally anxious to get the work done as soon
as possible, while those who are engaged by the day as naturally try
to spin out the work as long as they can. According to Carr's _Craven
Glossary_, a Day-work is three roods of land. "Four perches make a
day-worke; ten daysworks make a roode or quarter." (Twysden MS. quoted
by Halliwell.) The latter agrees with Norden's statement: "You must
know (says he), that there goe 160 perches to one acre; 80 perches to
halfe an acre; 40 perches to one roode, which is ¼ of an acre; ten
_daies worke_ to a roode, foure perches to a daies worke; 16 foote
and a halfe to a perche." (_Surveior's Dialogue_, 1610.) In Cowel's
_Interpreter_ we read "_Day-werc of Land_, as much arable ground as
could be ploughed up in one day's work, or one journey, as the farmers
still call it."
[E358] "Harvest lord," the principal reaper who goes first and
regulates the movements of the rest; _Harvest-Lady_, the second reaper
in the row, called in Cambridgeshire the _Harvest-Queen_. The rate at
which the _Harvest-lord_ reaped of course regulated that of the others,
and therefore Tusser recommends that he should have a penny or two
extra in order to encourage him to have an eye to the loiterers, and to
keep all up to the mark. Cf.:
"At heighe pryme Peres lete the plowe stonde,
To ouersen hem hymself, and who-so best wrouȝte
He shulde be huyred therafter whan heruest tyme come."
--Piers Plowman, ed. Skeat, E. E. Text Soc. B Text, Passus vi. 114.
The following particulars as to the farmer's expenses at harvest
time are quoted by Mr. Skeat in his notes to Piers Plowman, C. Text,
Passus ix. 104, from Sir J. Cullum's Hist. of Hawsted, Suffolk, 2nd
ed.: "The outgoings [in harvest] were called the costs of autumn,
and are thus stated. In 1388, [we find] the expences of a ploughman,
head reaper, baker, cook, brewer, _deye_, 244½ reapers (_sic_) hired
for 1 day; 30 bedrepes (days of work performed in harvest-time by the
customary tenants, at the _bidding_ of their lord), the men [being]
fed, according to custom, with bread and herring; 3 qrs. 3 bu. of wheat
from the stock; 5 qrs. 3 bu. of malt from the stock; meat bought,
10_s._ 10_d._; 5 sheep from the stock; fish and herrings bought, 5_s._;
herrings bought for the customary tenants, 7_d._; cheese, milk, and
butter bought (the dairy being let), 9_s._ 6_d._; salt, 3_d._; candles,
5_d._; pepper, 3_d._; spoons, dishes, and faucets, 5_d._ 30 bedrepes,
as before; 19 reapers, hired for 1 day, at their own board, 4_d._ each;
80 men, for 1 day, and kept at the lady's board, 4_d._ each: 40½ men
(_sic_) hired for 1 day, at 3_d._ each; the wages of the head reaper,
6_s._ 8_d._; of the brewer, 3_s._ 4_d._; of the cook, 3_s._ 4_d._ 30
acres of oats tied up by the job (_per taskam_), 1_s._ 8_d._; 6 acres
of bolymong cut and tied up by the job, 3_s._ 4_d._; 16 acres of pease,
cut by the job, 8_s._; 5 acres of pease and bolymong, cut and tied
up by the job, 2_s._ 6_d._; 3 acres of wheat, cut and tied up by the
job, 1_s._ 11_d._" [Here follow similar details for 1389, including a
mention of 5 pairs of harvest-gloves, 10_d._] "What a scene of bustling
industry was this! for, exclusive of the baker, cook, and brewer, who,
we may presume, were fully engaged in their own offices, here were
553 persons employed in the first year; in the second, 520; and in a
third, 538; yet the annual number of acres, of all sorts of corn, did
not much exceed 200. From this prodigious number of hands, the whole
business must have been soon finished. There were probably 2 principal
days; for two large parties were hired, every year, for 1 day each....
These ancient harvest-days must have exhibited one of the most cheerful
spectacles in the world. One can hardly imagine a more animated scene
than that of between 200 and 300 harvest-people all busily employed at
once, and enlivened with the expectation of a festivity, which perhaps
they experienced but this one season in the year. All the inhabitants
of the village, of both sexes, and all ages, that could work, must have
been assembled on the occasion; a muster that, in the present state of
things, would be impossible. The success of thus compressing so much
business into so short a time must have depended on the weather. But
dispatch seems to have been the plan of agriculture at this time, at
least in this village. We have seen before, that 60 persons were hired
for 1 day, to weed the corn. These throngs of harvest-people were
superintended by a person who was called the head-reaper (_supermessor_
or _præpositus_), who was annually elected, and presented to the
lord, by the inhabitants; and it should seem that, in this village at
least, he was always one of the customary tenants. The year he was in
office, he was exempt from all or half of his usual rents and services,
according to his tenure; he was to have his victuals and drink at the
lord's table, if the lord kept house (_si dominus hospitium tenuerit_);
if he did not, he was to have a livery of corn, as other domestics
had; and his horse was to be kept in the manor-stable. He was next in
dignity to the steward and bailiff. The hay-harvest was an affair of
no great importance. There were but 30 acres of grass annually mown at
this period. This was done or paid for by the customary tenants. The
price of mowing an acre was 6_d._"
By an "Assessment of the Corporation of Canterbury," made in 1594, the
following were the rates of wages declared payable:--"Every labourer
from Easter to Michaelmas, with meat and drink, 4_d._ per day; finding
himself, 10_d._; and from Michaelmas to Easter, with meat and drink,
4_d._; without, 8_d._ Mowers per day, with meat and drink, 8_d._;
finding themselves, 14_d._ By the acre, with meat and drink, 4_d._;
without, 8_d._ Reapers per day, with meat and drink, 6_d._; finding
themselves, 12_d._; by the acre, with meat and drink, 14_d._; without,
28_d_. Plashing and teeming of a quick hedge, 2_d._ per rod. Laying
upon the band and binding and copping of oats, 8_d._, barley, 10_d._
Threshers by the quarter with meat and drink, for the quarter and
making clean of wheat and rye, 5_d._, oats and barley, 3_d._; without
meat and drink, for the quarter and making clean of wheat and rye,
12_d._, oats and barley, 6_d._ Making talewood, the load, 4_d._;
billets, per 1000, 12_d._ A bailiff, with livery, £3 per annum; without
livery, £3 6_s._ 8_d._"--Hasted's Antiquities of Canterbury, 1801, vol.
ii. Appendix.
[E359] "Larges," "usually a shilling" (says Major Moor in his Suffolk
Glossary). "For this the reapers will ask you if you 'chuse to have
it hallered.' If answered, yes, they assemble in a ring, holding each
other's hands, and inclining their heads to the centre. One of them,
detached a few yards apart, calls loudly, thrice, 'Holla Lar!--Holla
Lar!--Holla Lar!--j e e s.' Those in the ring lengthen out o-o-o-o
with a low sonorous note and inclined heads, and then throwing the
head up, vociferate 'a-a-a-ah.' This thrice repeated for a shilling is
the established exchange in Suffolk." "Largesse bounty, handfuls of
money cast among the people."--Cotgrave. "Crye a larges when a rewarde
is geven to workemen, _stipem vociferare_."--Huloet's Dict. 1552. The
phrase "crie a largesse" occurs in Piers Plowman, B Text, xiii. 449. As
to the gloves given to harvest-men see above and note E309.
[E360] Though barley is generally mown, it is a slovenly practice,
unless when performed with a cradle scythe.--M. See note E87.
[E361] "Dallops," patches of barley which have run to straw.--M.
[E362] Tidie means _neat, proper,_ and _in season_.--M.
[E363] "There finding a smack," _i.e._ finding a pleasant repast.
[E364] "Doo perish," _i.e._ cause to perish, ruin: the use of "do" in
this sense is very common in Early English.
[E365] "Lengthen" here is equivalent to increase the extent or produce
of.
[E366] "Fill out the black boule," etc. I am quite unable to explain
this line; the "boule of bleith" is evidently the "merry bowl," but the
epithet _black_ I do not understand.
[E367] "Thrifts ladder may clime," _i.e._ may prosper. Cf. ch. 9.
[E368] "_That_ many doo hate," in edd. of 1573, 1580, 1585, etc., the
reading is "_as_ many do hate."
[E369] "Ling perhaps looks for great extolling, being counted the
beefe of the sea, and standing every fish-day (as a cold supporter) at
my Lord Maior's table: yet it is nothing but a long cod: whereof the
greater sised is called Organe Ling, and the other Codling, because
it is no longer then a Cod, and yet hath the taste of Ling: whilst it
is new it is called green-fish: when it is salted it is called Ling,
perhaps of lying, because the longer it lyeth ... the better it is,
waxing in the end as yellow as a gold noble, at which time they are
worth a noble a piece."--Muffett, pp. 154-5, quoted in the Babees Book,
ed. Furnivall.
[E370] The following prices of various articles in Suffolk will be
interesting:--1566. A lode of straw IIII_s._--1582. A capon VI_d._; a
calfe V_s._; a firkin of butter VII_s._ VII_d._; a capon and a pullet
VI_d._; a cocke (to fight) IIII_d._ (5 cockes bought to fight); a
pullett III_d._ 5 pullets, 5 capons, 5 cockes, 1 calfe, were provided
on the reckninge day and "these are allowed in the Churchwardens'
accompte to be paide by them."--1590. To Coke for IIII combes of w otes
whh he served to the Quene VI_s._ VIII_d._; 14 rod of ditching cost
V_s._ IIII_d._--1596. Makinge a surplis for the church was II_d._; a
payer of hoose was XII_d._ another XIII_d._; makyng this boke of accts
(a single sheet written on two sides) VI_d._--1599. Three days work
ditchynge 2_s._; a hard day's work was therefore 8_d._ per day, and
a usual day's 4_d._ or 6_d._; three days thatchinge (Thos. Garrarde)
II_s._ IIII_d._; wode was II_s._ the lode.--1587 or 8. A capon vi_d._;
a calfe v_s._; a firkin of butter vii_s._ viii_d._; two capons and one
pullett vi_d._; a cocke iiii_d._; one cocke and one pullett vi_d._;
one pullett iii_d._--1583 No. 5. One short spurred cocke ii_d._; one
chycken ii_d._; one hene ii_d._--1583 No. 4. Fower combes and too
bushell of ottes at iv_s._ iv_d._ the combe; thre henes att thre pence
a pece; bowes and arrowes IIII_d._; ten milch kine 30_s._ each; seven
bullocks 7_s._ each; six calves 5_s._ each; six horses together £7; one
acre of wheat, xx_s._; one acre of Bullimong land 33_s._ 4_d._; a new
carte £11; a porkling 28_d._
Increased facilities of communication, and the numerous means that
farmers now possess, through the press, of obtaining information as to
prices of produce, etc., render _riding about_ almost unnecessary.
[E371] Tusser again sets out the advantages of ready money
transactions, and of _keeping touch_, that is, punctuality and faithful
regard to engagements. He buys at first hand who pays ready money from
his own pocket; at second hand who pays ready money, but who, in order
to enable him to do so, has to borrow a portion of the amount, because
he has not so much money as he requires with him; at third hand who
buys on credit.
[E372] "Stourbridge or Sturbich, the name of a common field extending
between Chesterton and Cambridge, near the little brook Sture, for
about half a mile square, is noted for its fair which is kept annually
on September 19th, and continues a fortnight. It is surpassed by few
fairs in Great Britain, or even in Europe, for traffic, though of late
it is much lessened. The booths are placed in rows like streets, by the
name[s] of which they are called, as Cheapside, etc., and are filled
with all sorts of trades. The Duddery, an area of 80 or 100 yards
square, resembles Blackwell Hall. Large commissions are negotiated here
for all parts of England in cheese, woolen goods, wool, leather, hops,
upholsterers' and ironmongers' ware, etc., etc. Sometimes 50 hackney
coaches from London, ply morning and night, to and from Cambridge,
as well as all the towns around, and the very barns and stables are
turned into inns for the accommodation of the poorer people. After the
wholesale business is over, the country gentry generally flock in,
laying out their money in stage-plays, taverns, music-houses, toys,
puppet-shows, etc., and the whole concludes with a day for the sale
of horses. This fair is under the jurisdiction of the University of
Cambridge."--Walker's Gazetteer, ed. 1801. See also index to Brand's
Antiquities.
Camden says it was anciently called Steresbrigg, from the little
river Stere or Sture that runs by it (in his Britannia, under
Cambridgeshire). There have been many guesses at the name and origin
of this fair, _e.g._ that of Fuller in his History of the University,
p. 66, concerning the clothier of Kendal. The truth of the matter is
this: King John granted Sturbridge fair for the benefit of the hospital
of lepers which stood there (_v. decretum Hubert. Arch. Cantuar. in
Concil. Londinen. An._ 1200. _Regn. Johann._; Spelman, ii. 127): in
the certificatorium we are told that the keeper of the hospital holds
twenty-four and a half acres of land in the county of Cambridgeshire to
maintain these lepers. The Vice Chancellor has the same power in this
fair that he has in the town of Cambridge. The University is always
to have ground assigned for a booth by the mayor. Midsummer Fair was
granted to the Prior and Convent of Barnwell, for much the same reason
that Sturbridge was to the Lepers,--_ad eorum sustentationem_. In the
reign of Henry the Sixth the Nuns of St. Radegund had the grant of
Garlick Fair for the same reason.
"Sturbridge Fair was formerly proclaimed by both the Corporation and
the University authorities. Originally lasting six weeks, in 1785 it
lasted only three weeks, and now it lasts but one week. A very amusing
account of its proclamation by the Vice Chancellor will be found in
Gunning's 'Reminiscences of Cambridge.'"--S. N. in Notes and Queries,
Aug. 25, 1877.
"When th' fair is done, I to the Colledg come,
Or else I drinke with them at Trompington,
Craving their more acquaintance with my heart,
Till our next _Sturbridg Fair_; and so wee part."
--Brathwaite's Honest Ghost, 1658, p. 189.
[E373] "When it [the malt] hath gone, or beene turned, so long [21
days] vpon the floore, they carrie it to a kill, couered with _haire
cloth_, where they giue it gentle heats (after they haue spread it
there verie thin abroad) till it be drie, and in the meane while
they turne it often, that it may be vniformelie dried."--Harrison,
Description of England, ed. F. J. Furnivall, Part I. p. 156.
[E374] Cf. September's Husbandry, ch. 16 st. 1.
[E375] One part in ten is far below the present average value of land.
If the whole produce will clear _four_ rents, the industrious farmer
would have no reason to complain, though he is now subject to heavy
taxes, which, it is to be remarked are not included in the list of
outgoings.--M.
[E376] "Well fare the plough." On a flyleaf of a MS. of Piers Plowman
(MS. R. 3, 14, in Trinity Coll. Camb.) is written,
"God spede the plouȝ
& sende vs korne I-now."
See print in beginning of Wright's ed. of Piers Plowman.
[E377] The advice given in this short piece, the most difficult,
perhaps, that Tusser had written, is very good, but he has strained
alliteration to an extravagant pitch.
[E378] In the reign of Elizabeth an Act was passed, requiring a seven
years' apprenticeship to enable a person to set up in business or
trade; and hence the idea arose of dividing human life into periods of
seven years.--M. The idea is much older; for, in Arnold's Chronicle
(edition 1811), page 157, we find:--"The vij Ages of Mā liuing ī the
World. The furst age is infance and lastith from ye byrth vnto vij yere
of age. The ij is childhod and endurith vnto xv yere age. The iij age
is adholocencye and endurith vnto xxv yere age. The iiij age is youth
and endurith vnto xxxv yere age. The v age is manhod and endurith vnto
l yere age. The vj age is [elde] and lasteth vnto lxx yere age. The vij
age of mā is crepill and endurith vnto dethe."
See Prompt. Parv. p. 7, for another version of the above, the limits
assigned to the several stages being different, and the seventh stage
beginning at the resurrection.
[E379] "Foxe, Ape with his toieng," etc. Dr. Mavor's edition reads,
"For Ape with his toieng," etc.
[E380] "The tone from the tother;" the tone = that one, the tother
= that other; where the _t_ is the sign of the neuter gender, as in
tha-_t_, i-_t_; compare the Latin _d_ in i-_d_, quo-_d_, illu-_d_.--In
ch. 110, p. 201, we have the curious forms "_thon_" and "_thother_."
[E381] "To him and to hur," that is, to every one, or to any one. Cf.
94. 3, and
"The white lambe þat hurte was with the spere
Flemere of feendes out of hym and here."
--Chaucer, Man of Law's Tale, l. 460, Six-Text ed.
[E382] "Daieth" = dayeth, that is, appoints a _day_ on which he
promises to pay.
Gervase Markham, in the First Part of the English Husbandman, ch. 6,
remarks:--"You may by these usuall observations, and the helpe of a
better judgement, imploy the fruits of your labours to the best profit,
and sell everything at the highest price, except you take upon you to
_give day_ and sell upon trust, which if you doe, you may then sell at
what unconscionable reckoning you will." Cf.
"When drapers draw no gaines by _giving day_."
--Gascoigne, The Steel Glass, 1094.
[E383] "By that and by this;" that is, by anything, or by chance.
Compare stanza 6, and chap. 67, stanza 5, p. 153.
[E384] "A tode with an R" is an elegant euphemism for _torde_; the
meaning being that a bad husbandman is more likely to receive insults
and refusals, than compliance with his requests. Compare Wycliffe's
translation of Luke xiii. 8, as given at p. 365 of Dr. Bosworth's edit.
of the Gothic and Anglo-Saxon Gospels, with the Versions of Wycliffe
and Tyndale, London, 1865.
[E385] "Experience should seeme to proue playnely, that Inclosures
should be profitable and not hurtfull to the common weale; for we see
the countryes where most Inclosiers be, are most wealthy, as _Essex,
Kent, Northamptonshyre,_ etc. And I have hearde a Ciuilian once say,
that it was taken for a Maxime in his lawe (this saying), 'that which
is possessed of many in common, is neglected of all;' and experience
sheweth that Tenaunts in common be not so good husbandes, as when euery
man hath his parte in seueralty; also, I have heard say, that in the
most countreyes beyonde the Sea, they knowe not what a common grounde
meaneth."--Stafford's Examination of Complaints, New Shakspere Soc.,
ed. Furnivall, p. 40.
[E386] Fitzherbert shows how a township that is worth twenty marks
a-year may be made worth £20, and the ground-work of his plan is to
enclose the land. "By enclosing," he says, "a farmer shall save meat,
drink, and wages of a shepherd; the wages of the swineherd, the which
may fortune to be as chargeable as his whole rent; and also his corn
shall be better saved from eating or destroying by cattle."
[E387] Harman, 1567 (E. E. Text Soc., ed. Furnivall, p. 82), speaks of
"lewtering lusks and lazy _lorrels_," and in Pierce Plowman's Crede
we find in line 750, "lordes sones lowly to þo _losells_ aloute," and
in l. 755, "and leueþ swiche _lorels_ for her lowe wordes."--See Note
in Prompt. Parv. _s.v._ Lorel. Levins (Manip. Vocab. 1570) translates
_lorel_ by _nebulo, scurra_.
[E388] Courts for presenting nuisances are generally the greatest
nuisances themselves. Under the semblance of justice, they often retard
its execution. The members, or jury who compose them, do not want the
power, but they want the independence to act right.--M.
[E389] "In Bridewell a number be stript," etc. Although all the
editions I have been able to examine read "lesse worthie than _theefe_
to be whipt," I suspect the correct reading to be "lesse worthie than
_theese_ to be whipt." The mistake might easily occur through the
similarity of the old _s_ and _f_. The meaning, as the lines read at
present, is not very clear, but if we adopt the suggested reading, the
sense becomes at once apparent:--"In Bridewell many are stripped for
flogging who do not deserve it so much as these."
[E390] "Take them" = arrest them.
[E391] "Mo," lit. = more; but also used in the sense of others. "This
use of _mo_ is not common, but there are a few examples of it. Thus in
Specimens of English, ed. Morris and Skeat, we have at p. 47, l. 51,
"'Y sike for vnsete
Ant mourne ase men doþ _mo_.'
"_i.e._ 'I sigh for unrest, and mourn as _other_ men do.' And on the
next page (48, l. 22) we have
"'Mody meneþ so doþ _mo_,
Ichot ycham on of þo,'
"_i.e._ 'The moody moan as _others_ do; I wot I am one of them.'
Somewhat similar is the expression _oþer mo_, where we should now say
_others as well_, Piers Plowman, C. Text, Passus v. 10."--Rev. W.
Skeat, in note to l. 1039 of Chaucer, Clerke's Tale, Clarendon Press
Series. _Mo_ is also used in the same sense in 67, 11, p. 154.
[E392] "Verlets," originally a servant to a knight, below page or
squire, though often used in French Romance as equivalent to a squire.
"Pages, _varlets_, ou damoiseaux: noms quelquefois communs aux
_ecuyers_."--Cotgrave. Ducange (Gloss. M. et I. Lat.) has: "_Valeti
valecti_ appellati vulgo magnatum filii, qui necdum militare cingulum
consecuti erant: vassallorum filii _vassaleti_ dicti." Levins (Manip.
Vocab.) says: "Varlett, _verna_." See Wedgwood, Dict. Eng. Etymology,
_s.v._ Valet.
[E393] "Ruleth the roste;" to _rule_ the _roast_ is to preside at the
board, to assign what share one pleases to the guests; hence it came
to mean to domineer, in which sense it is commonly used in our old
authors. See Nares, s.v.
[E394] With this description of an envious neighbour compare Langland's
picture of _Invidia_ (Envy) in Piers Plowman, B. Text, E. E. Text Soc.,
ed. Skeat, Passus v. l. 76.
[E395] "His hatred procureth," etc., his hatred takes pains to bring
bad to worse, his friendship is like that of Judas who, etc., _i.e._ is
selfish.
[E396] "His lips out of frame," _i.e._ are out of order, are not kept
in order. Cf. the expression "loose in the haft."
[E397] "Spials;" so Spenser, Faery Queene, i. 4:
"And privie spials plast in all his way,"
Levins (Manip. Vocab.) has "Spyall, _arbiter_."
[E398] "Would'st thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascally
_sheepbiter_ come by some notable shame."--Shakspere, Twelfth Night,
Act ii. sc. 5.
"Who is in this closet? let me see (_breaks it open_). Oh,
_sheepbiter_, are you here?"--Shadwell, Bury Fair, 1689.
[E399] "Coxcombe:" see Cotgrave, s.v. _Effeminé, Enfourner, Fol,
Lambui_.
[E400] Davus is the common name in Terence for the cunning, plotting
servant.
[E401] Thersites, the ugliest and most scurrilous of the Greeks before
Troy. He spared in his revilings neither prince nor chief, but directed
his abuse especially against Achilles and Ulysses. The name is often
used to denote a calumniator. Cf.
"When rank Thersites opes his mastiff jaws,
We shall hear music, wit, and oracle."
--Shakspere, Troilus and Cressida, Act i. sc. 3.
[E402] "Shall swell like a tode." Cf. 65, 6.
[E403] "To hold a candle to the devil is to assist in a bad cause or an
evil matter."--Ray. Hazlitt (English Proverbs, p. 407) gives "'Tis good
sometimes to hold a candle to the devil." Thus we find an anonymous
correspondent writing to John Paston: "for howr Lords love, goo tharow
with Wyll Weseter, and also plese Chrewys as ye thynke in yow hert
best for to do; for it is a comon proverbe, 'A man must sumtyme _set a
candel befor the Devyle_;' and therfor thow it be not alder most mede
and profytabyl, yet of ij harmys the leste is to be take."--Paston
Letters, ed. Gairdner, ii. 73.
[E404] At Canterbury is a representation of Master Shorne holding up
his hand in a threatening attitude at the Devil, who is in a boot.
[E405] "False birds can fetch the wind;" an expression taken from
hawking. To _fetch the wind_, to _take the wind_ (Bacon), and to _have
the wind_ are various forms of the same expression, the meaning of
which is to gain or take an advantage. We still use the expression "to
get to windward of another," meaning to get the better or advantage of
him. Mavor reads, "false _words_ can fetch the wind," _i.e._ slander
will spread as though borne on the wind. I do not, however, know on
what authority he has adopted this reading, as the text of 1577 gives
"birds."
[E406] The following poem on Evil Tongues is from a MS. of the 15th
century, edited for the Percy Soc. by the late Mr. T. Wright, 1847:
"A man that con his tong stere,
He ther not rek wer that he go."
"Ittes knowyn in every schyre,
Wekyd tongges have no pere;
I wold thei wer brent in the fer,
That warke men soo mykyll wo.
Ittes knowyn in every lond,
Wekyd tongges don gret wrong,
Thei make me to lyyn long,
And also in myche car.
Ȝyf a man go in clothes gay,
Or elles in gud aray,
Wekyd tongges yet wyl say,
Wer cam the by therto?
Ȝyf a man go in cloys ill,
And have not the world at wyl,
Wekyd tongges thei wyll hym spyll,
And seyd he ys a stake, lat hym goo.
Now us to amend God yeve us grace,
Of repentens and of gud grace,
That we mut se hys glorius face.
Amen, Amen, for charyte."
[E407] There is a smoothness in the versification of this sonnet,
and a succession of imagery, though drawn from common sources, which
we do not often find in Tusser. He has made a good use of the figure
_erotesis_.--M. Compare Milton, Lycidas, 45:
"As killing as the canker to the rose,
Or _taint-worm_ to the weanling herds that graze."
[E408] Janus, an old Italian deity, the god of the sun and the year, to
whom the month of January was dedicated.
[E409] Ver = Spring, Æstas = Summer, Hyems = Winter.
[E410] "Delaide;" so in Spenser, Faery Queene, ix. 30. "But to _delay_
the heat," and in Prothalamium 3:
"Zephyrus did softly play
A gentle spirit, that lightly did _delay_
Hot Titan's beames."
[E411] Alluding to the thirteen revolutions of the moon in the year.
[E412] It appears from the Books of the Stationers' Company, on the
authority of Warton (Hist. of Eng. Poetry, vol. iii. p. 428) that
a licence was granted to T. Hackett, in the year 1562, to print "A
Dialogue of Wyvynge and Thryvynge of Tusshers with ij lessons for olde
and yonge."
[E413] "Bolted out," a term taken from the language and usage of
millers, who use the word "to bolt" of the separation of the bran from
the flour. Cf. Chaucer, Nonnes Prior's Tale, 415:
"But yit I can not _bult it to the bren_."
And Spenser, Faery Queene, iv. 24:
"He now had _boulted_ all the floure."
"Time and nature will _bolt out_ the truth of things."--D'Estrange.
"To _boulte out_ the truth in reasoning, _limare veritatem in
disceptatione_."--Baret's Alvearie. A "Bolting Cloth" is the name in
Lincolnshire for a cloth used for sifting meal in mills. See Peacock's
Glossary, _s.v._ There was a term "boultings" or "boltings," used of
private arguings of cases in some of the Inns of Court. "Boulter, a
sifter."--Coles' Dict. 1676.
[E414] "Could the way to thriue." _Could_ is here used in its old sense
of _knew_, or _understood_. A.S. _cunnan_, to know; _ic can_, I know;
_ic cuðe_, I knew.
[E415] "To stay himselfe in some good plot," etc.; compare 10. 8.
[E416] "Of this and that;" cf. 62. 10.
[E417] "The blacke oxe neare trod on thy fut:" a proverbial expression,
meaning, you have experienced misfortune close at home.
In Peacock's Glossary of Manley, etc. (E. D. Soc. 1877), we have:
"The _Black Bull's_ trodden on him;" that is, he is in a very bad
temper. And the following passage from Bernard's Terence is quoted:
"Prosperitie hangs on his sleeue; the _black oxe_ cannot tread on his
foot."
"Venus waxeth old; and then she was a pretie wench, when Juno was a
young wife; now crowes foote is on her eye, and the _black oxe_ hath
trod on her foot."--Lyly's Sapho and Phao, 1584, ed. 1858, i. 199.
Mr. George Vere Irving (Notes and Queries, 3rd Ser. xii. 488) remarks
that this expression is at this day frequently used in Scotland in
reference to a person who has experienced misfortune. See Hazlitt's
Eng. Proverbs, p. 359.
[E418] "It is too much we dailie heare," etc. This proverbial
expression occurs in the _Townley Mysteries_, p. 86, as--
"A man may not wive,
And also thrive,
And all in one year."
[E419] "As _mo_ have bin;" compare note E391.
[E420] "The good wiues husband weares no breech." So in a song in the
MS. of the 15th cent. quoted above, the heading of which is
"_Nova, Nova,_ sawe yow ever such,
The moste mayster of the hows weryth no brych."
The burden of the song being
"Lest the most mayster wer no brych."
[E421] The same reply is attributed to Thales. See his life in Diogenes
Laertius, Bk. i. 26.
[E422]
"Yyng men, I red that ye be war,
That ye cum not in the snar;
For he is browt in meche car,
That have a shrow onto his wyfe.
"In a panter I am caute,
My fot his pennyd, I may not owt;
In sorow and car he his put,
That have, etc.
"With a qwene yif that thou run,
Anon it is told into the town;
Sorow he hath both up and down,
That have, etc."
--Song in MS. of 15th century quoted above.
"Feareth me," that is, it frightens me, I fear, as in "me liketh" = it
pleases me, I like.
[E423] "As good a shrew is as a sheepe," etc. This proverb appears in
_Epistolæ Hoelianæ_, ed. 1754, p. 177, in a letter dated 5th February,
1625-6, as "It is better to marry a shrew than a sheep." In Taylor's
Pastorall, 1624, we have "A shrew is better than a sheep."
[E424] William, the first Lord Paget, and the patron of Tusser, married
Anne, daughter of Mr. Prestin, of the County of Lancaster; and to her
it is most probable the Book of Huswifery was dedicated, and not to
Margaret, the daughter of Sir H. Newton, and lady of Thomas, Lord Paget.
[E425] "By their fruits ye shall know them, do men gather grapes of
thorns or figs of thistles?"
[E426] The rime in the last two lines is most remarkable; apparently
_thriue_ is pronounced _threev_, as Mr. Ellis contends.
[E427] From the last two lines of this stanza it would appear that
Tusser was a widower at the time when he wrote this Address to the
Reader, or at least when he first wrote on the subject of Huswifery.
[E428] "A description of Huswife," etc. This antithetical description
seems to have been introduced, in order that it might correspond with
the description of Husbandry, chapter 8, p. 16.--M.
[E429] According to Fitzherbert, the farmers' wives must have been
patterns of diligence and industry, and a variety of duties devolved
upon them which have since ceased to be required, or have fallen
with more propriety upon the other sex. They had to measure out
the quantity of corn to be ground, and see that it was sent to the
miller. The poultry, swine, and cows were under their charge; and they
superintended the brewing and baking. The garden was peculiarly the
care of the farmer's wife. She had to depend upon it for various herbs
which are no longer in use, but which could not be dispensed with when
spices were rare and costly. Besides pot-herbs, strewing-herbs were
required for the chambers, and herbs possessing medical virtues. The
list of fruits at this date was confined to a few of indigenous growth,
which were but little improved by skill and management. Tusser directs
his housewife to transplant into her garden wild strawberries from the
woods. All the writers on rural economy during this period recommend
the farmer's wife carefully to attend to her crop of flax and hemp.
When, however, Fitzherbert asserts that it is a wife's duty "to winnow
all manner of corn, to make malt, to wash, and to make hay, shear
corn, and, in time of need, help her husband to fill the muck-wain or
dung-cart, drive the plough, to load hay, corn, and such other, to go
to market and sell butter or pigs, fowls or corn," it is to be presumed
that he had in his view the smallest class of yeomen, who had no hired
servants.
[E430] "Reason their cace," that is, gossip and argue over their
circumstances.
[E431] "Home is home, be it never so ill." Ballad licensed in 1569-70.
Clarke (Paræm. 1639, p. 101) has with us, "home is home, be it never so
homely." On the other hand, Heywood, in his Epigrams, 1562, says:
"Home is homely, yea, and to homely sometyme,
Where wives' footestooles to their husbandes' heads clime."
[E432] "Familie" = household. Compare chap. 9, st. 12.
[E433] "Maides, three a clock," etc. Compare Romeo and Juliet, Act iv.
sc. 4, 3--
"The second cock hath crow'd,
The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock."
[E434] "Lay your bucks," _i.e._ get ready the washing tubs.
Compare: "Throw foul linen upon him as if it were going to
_bucking_."--Shakspere, Merry Wives of Wind., Act iii. sc. 3.
Buck-basket, the basket in which linen is carried to the wash.
"Bouck-fatt, a washing tub."--Upton Inventories, p. 28. Cf. "And
for I can so wele wasche and so wele _bowke_, Godde has made me
his chaumberere."--The Pilgrimage of the Life of the Manhode, f.
21_b._, MS. in Libr. of St. John's Coll. Camb. "'I _bucke_ lynen
clothes to scoure of their fylthe and make them whyte, _Ie bue_.
Bucke these shyrtes, for they be to foule to be wasshed by hande,
_buez ces chemises, car elles sont trop sallies de les lauer a
sauon._'--Palsgrave. 'Buée, lie wherwith clothes are scowred; also
a _buck_ of clothes; _Buer_, to wash a _buck_, to scowre with lie;
_Buandiere_ f., a laundresse, or buck-washer.'--Cotgrave. To _buck_
is to cleanse clothes by steeping them in lye: see _Buck_ in Webster,
Nares, Wedgwood, etc."--Rev. W. W. Skeat, note to P. Plowman, B. Text,
xiv. 19.
[E435] The hours of meals varied at different dates. In the Myrour
of Our Lady, ed. Blunt, p. 15, we read: "At houre of tyerse [9 a.m.]
labourers desyre to haue theyr dyner."
In Chambers's Book of Days, i. 96, we read that Gervase Markham, in
1653, makes the ploughman have three meals, viz. breakfast at 6 a.m.,
dinner at half-past 3 p.m., and supper at 6 p.m. See also note E444.
[E436] In the Library of Caius Coll. Camb. is a volume of Tracts, No.
286, one of which, published in 1555, An Account of the Cruelties of
the King of Spain, has as its motto: "Beware of Had I wiste." This is
also the title of a poem in the Paradyce of Daynty Deuyses, 1578. It is
quoted by Sir Simon D'Ewes (Diary, etc., ii. 366):
"Telle neuere the more thoug thou myche heere,
And euere be waare of _had-y-wist_."
--Babees Book, ed. Furnivall, p. 264, l. 72.
[E437] See note E52.
[E438]
"Beware that ye geue no persone palled drynke, for feere
Hit mygtt brynge many a man in disese durynge many a yere."
--John Russell's Boke of Norture, in Babees Book, p. 13.
"Sowre ale, and dead ale, and ale the whiche doth stande a tylte is
good for no man."--Andrew Boorde, Regimen of Health.
"Of ale and beer, as well as of wine, we find various kinds mentioned.
There were single beer, or small ale, which could do little more than
quench thirst,--and double beer, which was recommended as containing a
double quantity of malt and hops,--and double-double beer, which was
twice as strong as that,--and dagger-ale, which, as the name implies,
was reckoned particularly sharp and dangerous,--and bracket, a kind
of ale which we are unable distinctly to describe. But the favourite
drink, as well as the chief article of vulgar debauch, was a kind of
ale commonly called huffcap, but which was also termed 'mad dog,'
'angel's food,' 'dragon's milk,' and other such ridiculous names, by
the frequenters of ale-houses: 'and never,' says Harrison, 'did Romulus
and Remus suck their she-wolf with such eager and sharp devotion as
these men hale at huffcap, till they be as red as cocks, and little
wiser than their combs.' The higher classes, who were able to afford
such a luxury, brewed a generous liquor for their own consumption,
which they did not bring to the table till it was two years old. This
was called March ale, from the month in which it was brewed. But the
servants had to content themselves with a more simple beverage that
was seldom more than a month old. A cup of choice ale was often as
richly compounded with dainties as the finest wines. Sometimes it was
warmed, and qualified with sugar and spices; sometimes with a toast;
often with a roasted crab or apple, making the beverage still known
under the name of Lambs'-wool; while to stir the whole composition with
a sprig of rosemary, was supposed to give it an additional flavour.
The drinks made from fruit were chiefly cider, perry, and mum. Those
that had formerly been made from honey seem to have fallen into disuse
in consequence of the general taste for stronger potations; metheglin
being now chiefly confined to the Welsh. A simple liquor, however,
was still used in Essex, called by Harrison, somewhat contemptuously,
'a swish-swash,' made of water with a little honey and spice, but
'as differing,' he says, 'from true metheglin as chalk doth from
cheese.' He informs us, moreover, that already the tapsters of
England had learned to adulterate their ale and beer with pernicious
compounds."--Pict. Hist. of England, ii. 883.
"In the parish of Hawsted, Suffolk, the allowance of food to the
labourer in harvest was, two herrings per day, milk from the manor
dairy to make cheese, and a loaf of bread, of which fifteen were made
from a bushel of wheat. Messes of potage made their frequent appearance
at the rustic board."--Knight, Pict. Hist. of England, i. 839.
[E439] Harrison gives an account (pp. 153-4) of the following kinds of
bread made in England: 1. Mainchet, "commonlie called white bread, in
Latine _Primarius panis_." 2. Cheat "or wheaton bread, so named bicause
the colour therof resembleth the graie [or yellowish] wheat [being
cleane and well dressed,] and out of this is the coursest of the bran
(vsuallie called gurgeons or pollard) taken. The raueled is a kind of
cheat bread also, but it reteineth more of the grosse, and lesse of
the pure substance of the wheat." 3. Brown bread, of which there were
two kinds, viz. (_a_) of whole meal unsifted, (_b_) pollard bread,
with a little rye meal, and called Miscelin or Meslin. "In champeigne
countries much rie and barleie bread is eaten, but especiallie where
wheat is scant and geson."
[E440] "Baies." Halliwell prints this word as _baics_ in his
Dictionary, defining it as "chidings, reproofs," and giving as his
authority Hunter's Additions to Boucher.
[E441] "Droie." See Note in Prompt. Parv., s.v. _Dryvylle_ and _Deye_.
Probably a corruption of _droile_; a scullion, kitchen-boy, or servant
of all-work.--M. Droie also occurs in Stubbes' Anatomie of Abuses, 1583.
[E442] "In some places it [the malt] is dried at leisure with wood
alone, or strawe alone, in other with wood and strawe togither; but
of all, the strawe dried is the most excellent. For the wood dried
malt when it is brued, beside that the drinke is higher of colour,
it dooth hurt and annoie the head of him that is not vsed thereto,
bicause of the smoake. Such also as vse both indifferentlie, doo
barke, cleaue and drie their wrood in an ouen, thereby to remooue all
moisture that shuld procure the fume, and this malt is in the second
place, and with the same likewise, that which is made with dried firze,
broome, etc.; whereas, if they also be occupied greene, they are in
maner so preiudiciall to the corne, as is the moist wood."--Harrison,
Description of England, ed. F. J. Furnivall, Part I. p. 157.
[E443] See Note E116.
[E444] "The husbandmen dine at high noone as they call it, and sup at
seuen or eight."--Harrison, Part I. p. 166.
[E445] Though all the standard editions read "chaps walking," may it
not be a misprint for "chaps wagging," that is, mouths craving?--M.
[E446] "Enough is a plentie." Cf. "Mesure is medcyne þouȝ þow moche
ȝerne."--Piers Plowman, Passus i. 35. "But mesure is a meri mene, þouȝ
men moche ȝerne."--Richard the Redeles, E.E. Text Soc., ed. Skeat, ii.
139. "Measure is treasure."--Dyce's Skelton, ii. 238, 241. "Enough is
as good as a feast."--Gascoigne's Posies, 1575.
[E447] "Chippings." The "Chippings of Trencher-brede" in Lord Percy's
household were used "for the fedynge of my lords houndis."--Percy
Household Book, p. 353. "Other ij pages ... them oweth to _chippe_
bredde, but too nye the crumme."--Household Ordin. pp. 71-2. In the
_Regimen Sanitatis Salerni_, ed. 1634, p. 71, we are warned against
eating crusts, because "they ingender a dust cholor, or melancholly
humours, by reason that they bee burned and dry."
[E448] "Call quarterly seruants to court and to leete," that is, call
to account.
[E449] "Lurching," cf. footnote 1, p. 64.
[E450] "Bandog," cf. note E35.
[E451] "Guise."
"For he was laid in white Sheep's wool
New pulled from tanned Fells;
And o'er his Head hang'd Spiders webs
As they had been Bells.
Is this the _Country Guise_, thought he?
Then here I will not stay."
--Ballad, K. Alfred and the Shepherd.
"'Tis thy _Country Guise_, I see,
To be thus bluntish still."
--Ibid.
"The Norman _guise_ was to walke and jet up and downe the
streets."--Lambert's Peramb. of Kent, 1826, p. 320.
[E452] "Plough Monday." "The Monday next after Twelfth-day, when our
Northern plow-men beg plow-money to drink; and in some places if the
plowman (after that day's work) come with his whip to the kitchin
hatch, and cry 'cock in pot' before the maid says 'cock on the
dung-hill,' he gains a cock on Shrove-Tuesday."--Coles' Dict. 1708.
"Among the rural customs connected with the anniversary of Christmas
were those of Plough-Monday, which fell on the first Monday after
Twelfth-day. This was the holiday of the ploughmen, who used to go
about from house to house begging for plough-money to drink. In the
northern counties, where this practice was called the fool-plough (a
corruption perhaps of _yule_-plough), a number of sword-dancers dragged
about a plough, while one of the party, called the Bessey, was dressed
for the occasion like an old woman; and another, who was the fool of
the pageant, was almost covered with skins, and wore the tail of some
animal dangling down his back. While the rest danced, one of these odd
personages went among the spectators, rattling a box, and collecting
small donations; and it is said that whosoever refused to pay had the
plough dragged to his door and the soil of his threshold ploughed
up."--Pict. Hist. of England, ii. 894.
[E453] The Skreene was a wooden settee or settle, with a high back
sufficient to screen the sitters from the outward air, and was in the
time of our ancestors an invariable article of furniture near all
kitchen fires, and is still seen in the kitchens of many of our old
farm-houses in Cheshire. The meaning of the two lines:
"If ploughman get hatchet or whip to the skreene,
maides loseth their cock if no water be seene,"
is, "if the ploughman can get his whip, ploughstaff, hatchet, or
anything he wants in the field to the fireside (_screen_ being here
equivalent to _fireside_) before the maid has got her kettle on, then
she loses her Shrove-tide cock, which belongs wholly to the men."
[E454] "Shroftide." The Hen is hung at a Fellow's back who has also
some Horse Bells about him, the rest of the Fellows are blinded, and
have Boughs in their Hands, with which they chase this Fellow and his
Hen about some large Court or small Enclosure. The Fellow with his
Hen and Bells shifting as well as he can, they follow the sound, and
sometimes hit him and his Hen, other times, if he can get behind one
of them, they thresh one another well favour'dly; but the Jest is, the
Maids are to blind the Fellows, which they do with their Aprons, and
the cunning Baggages will endear their Sweet Hearts with a peeping
hole, while the others look out as sharp to hinder it. After this the
Hen is boil'd with Bacon, and store of Pancakes and Fritters are made.
She that is noted for lying a Bed long or any other Miscarriage, hath
the first Pancake presented to her, which most commonly falls to the
Dog's share at last, for no one will own it their due.--T.R.
"Let glad Shrove Tuesday bring the pancake thin
Or fritters rich with apples stored within."
--Oxford Sausage.
[E455] "Wake Day." The Wake-day is the day on which the Parish Church
was dedicated, called So, because the Night before it, they were used
to watch till Morning in the Church and feasted all the next day.
Waking in the Church was left off because of some abuses, and we see
here it was converted to wakeing at the Oven.--T.R. "Similar to the
church-ales, though of a still more ancient origin, were the Wakes. It
had been the custom, on the dedication of a church, or the birth-day
of a saint, for the people to assemble on the night previous, to hold
a religious vigil in the open air; and, as they remained all night
occupied in devotional exercises, this practice was called a wake.
Such a method of spending the night, however, soon gave place to very
different employments; and feasting, riot, and licentiousness became
the prevailing characteristics of these vigils. These concourses,
also, from every neighbouring town and parish, naturally suggested the
expediency of improving such opportunities for the purposes of traffic;
and hence the wakes gradually became fairs, which in some places they
still continue to be."--Pict. Hist. of England, ii. 897.
[E456] "Flawnes;" a kind of pancake was also so called. Nettleham
feast at Easter is called the _Flown_, possibly from _flauns_ having
been formerly eaten at that period of the year: but see Babees Book,
p. 173, where Flawnes are stated to be "_Cheesecakes_ made of ground
cheese beaten up with eggs and sugar, coloured with saffron, and baked
in 'cofyns' or crusts."
"Bread an chese, butere and milk,
Pastees and _flaunes_."
--Havelok, ed. Skeat, 644.
_For flaunes._
"Take new chese and grynde hit fayre,
In morter with egges, without dysware;
Put powder þerto of sugur, I say,
Coloure hit with safrone ful wele þou may;
Put hit in cofyns þat ben fayre,
And bake hit forthe, I þe pray."
--Liber Cure Cocorum, ed. Morris, p. 39.
[E457] A goose used formerly to be given at harvest-home, to those who
had not overturned a load of corn in carrying during harvest.--M.
[E458] "Fyrmente is made of whete and mylke, in the whiche, yf flesshe
be soden, to eate it is not commendable, for it is harde of dygestyon;
but whan it is dygested it doth nowrysshe, and it doth strength a
man."--Andrew Boorde's Dyetary, E.E. Text Soc. ed. F. J. Furnivall, p.
263. The following recipe for making Furmenty is from the Liber Cure
Cocorum, ed. Morris, p. 7:
_Furmente._
Take wete, and pyke [pick] hit fayre (and clene)
And do hit in a morter shene;
Bray hit a lytelle, with water hit spryng [sprinkle]
Tyl hit hulle, with-oute lesyng.
Þen wyndo [winnow] hit wele, nede þou mot;
Wasshe hit fayre, put hit in pot;
Boyle hit tylle hit brest, þen
Let hit doun, as I þe kenne.
Take now mylke, and play hit up
To hit be thykkerede to sup.
Lye hit up with yolkes of eyren [eggs],
And kepe hit wele, lest hit berne [burn].
Coloure hit with safron and salt hit wele,
And servys hit forthe, Syr, at þe mele;
With sugur candy þou may hit dowce,
If hit be served in grete lordys howce.
Take black sugur for mener menne;
Be ware þerwith, for hit wylle brenne [burn].
The following recipes for the manufacture of Furmenty are given
in Pegge's Forme of Cury, pp. 91 and 121: 1. For to make Furmenty,
"Nym [Take] clene wete, and bray it in a morter wel that the
holys [hulls] gon al of and seyt [seethe] yt til it breste and nym yt
up, and lat it kele [cool] and nym fay re fresch broth and swete mylk
of Almandys or swete mylk of kyne and temper yt al, and nym the yolkys
of eyryn [eggs], boyl it a lityl and set yt adoun and messe yt forthe
wyth fast venyson and fresch moton." 2. For to make Formenty on a
Fische-day, "Tak the mylk of the Hasel Notis, boyl the wete wyth the
aftermelk til it be dryyd, and tak and colour yt wyth Saffroun, and
the ferst mylk cast therto and boyle wel and serve yt forth." In Mr.
Peacock's Glossary of Manley, etc., we have: "Frumerty, a preparation
of creed-wheat [wheat simmered until tender] with milk, currants,
raisins and spices in it."
[E459] To make Aqua Composita, chap. 223: "Take of Sage, Hysope,
Rosemarie, Mynt, Spike or Lauender leaues, Marioram, Bay leaues, of
each like much, of all foure good handfulles to one galon of liquour.
Take also of Cloues, Mace, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cinnamon, Pepper, Graines,
of each a quarter of an ounce, Liquorice and Annise, of each halfe a
pound: beat the spices grosse [not fine, coarse], and first wash the
herbes, then breake them gently betweene your hands. Scrape off the
barke from the Liquorice, and cut it into thin slices, and punne [beat,
pound] the Annise grosse, then put altogether into a gallon or more of
good Ale or Wine, and let them steepe all night close couered in some
vessell of earth or wood, and the next morning after distill them with
a Limbecke or Serpentine. But see that your fire be temperate, and that
the head of your Limbecke be kept colde continually with fresh water,
and that the bottom of your Limbecke bee fast luted with Rye dough,
that so Ayre issue out. The best Ale to make Aqua Composita of is to be
made of Wheate malte, and the next of cleane Barley malte; and the best
Wine for that purpose is Sacke."--Cogan's Haven of Health, ed. 1612,
pp. 222-3.
[E460] A Cockney, the derivation of which word has been much disputed,
appears to me clearly to come from the verb to _cocker_, to _cock_, by
contraction, as in this passage. A _cockney_, therefore, is one who
has been brought up effeminately, and spoilt by indulgence, whether a
native of the city or of the country.--M.
"The original meaning of _cockney_ is a child too tenderly or
delicately nurtured, one kept in the house and not hardened by
out-of-doors life; hence applied to citizens, as opposed to the
hardier inhabitants of the country, and in modern times confined
to the inhabitants of London. The Promptorium Parvulorum, and the
authorities cited in Mr. Way's note, give '_Coknay_, carifotus,
delicius, mammotrophus'; 'To bring up like a _cocknaye_, mignoter.'
'Delicias facere, to play the _cockney_.' Cf. 'Puer in deliciis
matris nutritus, Anglice, a _cokenay_.'--Halliwell. '_Cockney_,
niais, mignot.'--Sherwood. The Fr. _coqueliner_, to dandle, cocker,
fedle, pamper, make a wanton of a child, leads us in the right
direction."--Wedgwood, Etymol. Dict. "A _cockney_, a childe tenderly
brought up; a dearling. _Cockering_, mollis ilia educatio quam
indulgentiam vocamus."--Baret's Alvearie, 1580.
[E461] In chapter 62 of the First Part of this work, p. 139, we had a
comparison between good and bad husbandry, and we are here presented
with a contrast between good and bad huswifery.
[E462] Compare Taming of the Shrew, Act iv. sc. 3, 57:
"With scarfs and fans and double change of _bravery_."
[E463] "Good huswiferie _canteth_." The ed. of 1573 reads "_franteth_"
the meaning of which is "to be careful, economical."
[E464] For boys the practice of music would be degrading, except as a
profession; and even for girls, however fashionable it may be, it is
generally worse than useless, as it occupies that time which ought to
be devoted to much more important purposes.--M.
[E465] "Least homelie breaker," etc., that is, lest an inexperienced
teacher ruin the mind of the pupil, as an unpractised horse-breaker
will spoil a promising colt.
[E466] "Well a fine," a phrase meaning to a good purpose, a good result.
[E467] "Cocking Mams," that is, over-indulgent mothers. "A father to
much _cockering_, Pater nimis indulgens."--Baret's Alvearie, 1580. See
Note E460.
[E468] "Shifting Dads," that is, fathers who are constantly shifting
their children from one school to another.
[E469] "Assone as a passenger comes to an Inne the Host or Hostesse
visit him; and if he will eate with the Host or at a common table with
others, his meale will cost him sixe pence, or in some places but foure
pence (yet this course is lesse honourable and not used by gentlemen);
but if he will eate in his chamber he commands what meate he will,
according to his appetite, and as much as he thinkes fit for him and
his company."--Fynes Moryson's Itinerary, 1617, Part III. p. 151.
[E470] "To purchase linne." To purchase Lynn, by petty savings, seems
to have been a proverbial mode of expression, used in ridicule of
stinginess.
[E471] "You are on the high way to Needham."--Ray.
[E472] The braggadocios and coxcombs of the day would use their
daggers to carve with, which were perfectly harmless for any other
purpose. Forks were yet strangers to an English dinner-table. Knives
were first _made_ in England, according to Anderson, in 1563. A
meat-knife of Queen Elizabeth's, mentioned in Nichols's "Progresses,"
had "a handle of white bone and a conceyte in it." In the same work
we read of "a dozen of horn spoons in a bunch," as the instruments
"meetest to eat furmenty porage with all;" also of "a folding spoon of
gold," and "a pair of small snuffers, silver-gilt."--Pictorial History
of England, ii. 856.
[E473] "Go toie with his nodie." The edition of 1573 reads "go toy
with his noddy, with ape in the street," and more recent editions
read "go toy with his noddy-like ape in the street." This reading has
been adopted by Dr. Mavor. Peacock's Gloss. gives "Noddipol a sillie
person. 'Whorson _nodipol_ that I am!'--Bernard's Terence, 43. 'A verye
_nodypoll_ nydyote myght be ashamed to say it.'--The Workes of Sir
Thomas More, 1557, p. 209."
[E474] "Fisging." The Rev. W. Skeat, in his note to Piers Plowman,
C. Text, Passus x. l. 153, "And what frek of þys folde _fiskeþ_ þus
a-boute," remarks: "_Fisketh_, wanders, roams. As this word is scarce,
I give all the instances of it that I can find. In Sir Gawayne and the
Grene Knight, ed. Morris, l. 1704, there is a description of a foxhunt,
where the fox and the hounds are thus mentioned:--
'& he fyskez hem by-fore · þay founden hym sone'--_i.e._
and he (the fox) runs on before them (the hounds); but they soon found
him. 'Fyscare abowte ydylly; Discursor, discursatrix, vagulus vel
vagator, vagatrix.'--Prompt. Parv. p. 162. 'Fiskin abowte yn ydilnesse;
Vago, giro, girovago.'--Ibid.
'Such serviture also deserveth a check,
That runneth out _fisking_, with meat in his beck [_mouth_].'
--Tusser, Five Hundred Points, etc., ed. Mavor, p. 286.
'Then had every flock his shepherd, or else shepherds; now they do not
only run _fisking about_ from place to place, ... but covetously join
living to living.'--Whitgift's Works, i. 528. 'I _fyske_, ie fretille.
I praye you se howe she _fysketh_ about.'--Palsgrave. '_Trotière_, a
raumpe, fisgig, _fisking_ huswife, raunging damsell.'--Cotgrave.
'Then in cave, then in a field of corn,
Creeps to and fro, and _fisketh_ in and out.'
--Dubartas (in Nares).
'His roving eyes rolde to and fro,
He _fiskyng_ fine, did mincyng go.'
--Kendalls's Flower of Epigrammes, 1577 (Nares).
'Tom Tankard's cow....
Flinging about his halfe aker, _fisking_ with her tail.'
--Gammer Gurton's Needle, i. 2.
'_Fieska_, to _fisk_ the tail about; to _fisk_ up and down.'--Swedish
Dictionary, by J. Serenius. '_Fjeska_, v.n. to fidge, to fidget, to
_fisk_.'--Swed. Dict. (Tauchnitz)."
[E475] In the Rolls of Parliament, at the opening of the Parliament of
2 Rich. II. in the year 1378, we find--"Qui sont appellez _Bacbyters_
sont auxi come chiens qi mangeont les chars crues," etc. In the Ancren
Riwle (Camden Soc. ed. Morton), p. 86, are described two kinds of
_backbiters_, who are defined generally as "Bacbitares, þe biteð oðre
men bihinden"; the two kinds are 1. those who openly speak evil of
others, and 2. those who under the cloak of friendship slander others.
The latter is stated to be far the worse. In an Old Eng. Miscellany (E.
E. Text Soc. ed. Morris), p. 187, we are told that "Alle _bacbytares_
heo wendeþ to helle."--Rev. W. W. Skeat, note to P. Plowman, B. v. 89.
[E476] "The friend doth hate." The edition of 1585 reads, evidently by
a misprint, _fiends_.
[E477] "Roinish," lit. scurvy, hence coarse, rough. "_Rongneux_,
scabbie, mangie, scurvie."--Cotgrave. It occurs twice in the "Romaunt
of the Rose," ll. 988 and 6190. In the form _rinish_, signifying
"wild, jolly, unruly, rude," it is found among the Yorkshire words in
Thoresby's Letter to Ray, reprinted by the Eng. Dial. Soc. "Rennish,"
in the sense of "furious, passionate," which is in Ray's collection of
North-country words, is, perhaps, another form of the word.
[E478] "Still presently," _i.e._ always as close at hand.
[E479] "In vsing there his will," that is, in doing so he acted of his
own free will.
[E480] "Seene" = appeared, showed himself.
[E481] "Do show" (to who thou wouldst to know). The meaning is
perfectly clear, but the manner in which it is expressed is very
curious. We may paraphrase it thus: "doth show to him whom thou wishest
to teach."
[E482] Compare Psalm ciii. 15, 6.
[E483] "Let gift no glorie looke," that is, in giving alms look for
(expect) no praise or earthly reward for so doing.
[E484] "Provoke" = urge.
[E485] In the edition of 1577 the arrangement of this chapter is
somewhat different. The Latin verses are first printed by themselves,
and headed "Sancti Barnardi dicta," and after comes the English
version, with the following title: "Eight of Saint Barnardes verses,
translated out of Latin | into english by this Aucthor for one kind |
of note to serue both ditties." The translation in the "Paradise of
Dainty Devices," mentioned by Mason, is by Barnaby Rich, under the
signature of "My Luck is Loss." The following is the first verse,
transcribed for comparison with Tusser's version:
"Why doth each state apply itself to worldly praise?
And undertake such toil, to heap up honour's gain,
Whose seat, though seeming sure, on fickle fortune stays,
Whose gifts are never prov'd perpetual to remain?
But even as earthen pots, with every fillip fails:
So fortune's favour flits, and fame with honour quails."
[E486] "Carle." M. Licinius Crassus, surnamed Dives, or the Rich, one
of the first Roman Triumvirate, and celebrated for his avarice and love
of the table.
[E487] "O thou fit bait for wormes!" In the Treatise of Vincentio
Saviolo, printed in 1595 with the title "Vincentio Saviolo his
Practise. In two Bookes. The first intreating of the use of the Rapier
and Dagger. The second of Honor and Honorable Quarrels," the printer's
device has the motto: "O wormes meate: O froath: O vanitie: why art
thou so insolent." Compare "As you Like it," Act iii. sc. 2, 59, "Most
shallow man! thou worm's meat!"
[E488] "For fortunes looke." In editions of 1573 and 1585 the reading
is "For fortune, look." It is evident that these verses were written
at the time when our author first retired from court, and that they
were appended to this work long after. They allude to recent events,
to "fatal chance," and to other circumstances, which would have been
obliterated from the mind after the lapse of so many years.--M. See
Tusser's Autobiography, ch. 114, stanza 14, p. 208.
[E489] "Too daintie fed;" that is, to one who has been accustomed to
luxury, and high living.
[E490] "If court with cart, etc." If one, who has been a courtier, must
put up with the life of the country.
[E491] "What toesed eares." _Toese_, or _touze_, to worry (as a dog
does a bear), properly used of the dressing of wool, and thence
metaphorically, as in Spenser, Faerie Queene, xi. 33,
"And as a beare, whom angry curres have _touz'd_:"
to the dog who pulls the fell off the bear's back. Cf. the old name for
a dog, _Towzer_. Coles renders _tose_ or _toze_ by "_carpo, vellico_."
Baret, Alvearie, 1580, gives, "to Tosse wooll, _carpere lanam_."
Compare chap. 99. 4, p. 189, "so _tossed_ with comorants," which is
spelt _toesed_ in the ed. of 1577, and _teazed_ in those of 1580 and
1585.
[E492] "What robes." The livery or _vestis liberata_, often called
robe, allowed annually by the college.--Warton, Hist. of Eng. Poetry.
[E493] Penny-ale is common, thin ale. It is spoken of in Piers Plowman,
ed. Skeat, Passus xv. l. 310, as a most meagre drink, only fitted for
strict-living friars. It was sold at _a penny a gallon_, while the best
ale was _four pence_.
"Peny ale and podyng ale she poured togideres
For labourers and for lowe folke, þat lay by hym-selue."
--Piers Plowman, B. Text, Passus v. 220.
[E494] "Sundrie men had plagards then." See remarks in Biographical
Sketch, p. xii.
[E495] "The better brest," etc. On these words Hawkins, in his Hist. of
Music, ed. 1853, ii. 537, remarks: "In singing, the sound is originally
produced by the action of the lungs, which are so essential an organ
in this respect, that to have a _good breast_ was formerly a common
periphrasis to denote a _good singer_." Cf. Shakspere, Twelfth Night,
Act ii. sc. 3, "By my troth, the fool hath an excellent breast."
Halliwell quotes:
"I syng not musycall
For my _brest_ is decayd."
--Armonye of Byrdes, p. 5.
Ascham, in his Toxophilus, says, when speaking of the expediency
of educating youths in singing: "Trulye two degrees of men, which
have the highest offices under the king in all this realme, shall
greatly lacke the vse of singinge, preachers and lawyers, because they
shall not, without this, be able to rule theyr _brestes_ for euerye
purpose."--Lond. 1571, fo. 86; and in Strype's Life of Arch. Parker it
is stated that "In the Statutes of Stoke College, Suffolk, founded by
Parker, is a provision in these words: 'of which said queristers, after
their _breasts_ are changed, will the most apt of wit and capacity be
holpen with exhibitions of forty shillings.'"
[E496] Nicholas Udall was the author of our oldest known comedy
"Roister Doister." He was born 1505, and was Master first at Eton and
afterwards at Westminster, at both of which places he became notorious
for the severity of his punishments. He wrote several dramas, now lost,
one of which, "Ezekias," was acted before Queen Elizabeth at Cambridge,
and, in all probability, "Roister Doister" was intended to be performed
by his pupils.
[E497] As to Tusser's pedigree see letter from the Windsor Herald, in
the Biographical Sketch, p. xii.
[E498] "Tiburne play." Tyburn appears from authentic records to have
been used as a place of execution in the time of Edward III. and
probably before. See also stanza 35 post. There was another place of
execution, in the parish of St. Thomas-a-Waterings, in Southwark,
called for distinction Tyburn _of Kent_. See Pegge's Kenticisms, ed.
Skeat, Proverb 11, and Dr. Johnson's Poem of London, l. 238, and the
note on it in Hales's Longer Eng. Poems, 1872, p. 313.
[E499] "A towne of _price_." A common expression in old English,
meaning of high estimation, noble. See Halliwell, s.v.
[E500] "Norfolk wiles," etc. The East Anglians were noted for their
litigious propensities. Fuller, in his Worthies, says, "Whereas
_pedibus ambulando_ is accounted but a vexatious suit in other
counties, here (where men are said to study law as following the
plough-tail) some would persuade us that they will enter an action
for their neighbour's horse but looking over their hedge." An Act was
passed in 1455 (33 Henry VI. cap. 7) to check the litigiousness of the
district: "Whereas, of time not long past, within the city of Norwich,
and the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, there were no more but 6 or 8
attornies at the most that resorted to the King's Courts, in which time
great tranquillity reigned in the said city and counties, and little
trouble or vexation was made by untrue and foreign suits. And now so it
is, that in the said city and counties, there be fourscore attornies
or more, the more part of them having no other thing to live upon but
only his gain by the practice of attorneyship, and also the more part
of them not being of sufficient knowledge to be an attorney, which
come to every fair, market, and other places, where is any assembly
of people, exhorting, procuring, moving and inciting the people to
attempt untrue foreign suits for small trespasses, little offences
and small sums of debt, whose actions be triable and determinable in
Court Barons; whereby proceed many suits, more of evil will and malice
than of the truth of the thing, to the manifold vexation and no little
damage of the inhabitants of the said city and counties, and also to
the perpetual destruction of all the Courts Baron in the said counties,
unless convenient remedy be provided in this behalf; the foresaid Lord
the King considering the premises, by the advice, assent and authority
aforesaid, hath ordained and established, that at all times from
henceforth there shall be but six common attornies in the said County
of Norfolk, and six common attornies in the said County of Suffolk, and
two common attornies in the said City of Norwich, to be attornies in
the Courts of Record; and that all the said fourteen attornies shall be
elected and admitted by the two Chief Justices of our Lord the King for
the time being, of the most sufficient and best instructed, by their
discretions." East Anglians were frequently called "Barrators," that
is, incitors to lawsuits (O. Fr. _bareter_, to deceive, cheat).
[E501] "Diram sell." West Dereham Abbey, near Downham, Norfolk, founded
by Hubert Walter, Archbishop of Canterbury, for Præmonstratensian
canons.
[E502] Faiersted, a parish about four miles from Witham, and near our
author's birthplace.
[E503] The plague, to which Tusser evidently alludes, according
to Maitland, raged in London in 1574 and 1575. It must have been
subsequent to 1573, as the edition of that date does not contain this
or the following stanza.
[E504] This and the preceding stanzas were first introduced in the
edition of 1580.
[E505] Cf.
"The rank is but the guinea stamp,
A man's a man for a' that."
--Burns.
[E506] "Cocking Dads." Cf. ch. 95, stanza 5, p. 186.
[E507] "Of hir or him." See note E381.
[E508] "L'homme propose, Dieu dispose."
[E509] "Or for to iet," etc. "The Normane guise was, to walke and
_jet_ up and downe the streetes, with great traines of idle serving men
following them."--Lambarde's Peramb. of Kent, Reprint of 1826, p. 320.
"_Jetting_ along with a giant-like gate."--Tom Tel-Troth's Message, New
Shak. Soc. ed. Furnivall, p. 125. "Rogue, why winkest thou? Jenny, why
_jettest_ thou?"--R. Holme, Names of Slates, Bk. iii. ch. v. p. 265.
"_Item_, That no scholler be out of his college in the night season, or
goe a _Jetting_, and walke the streetes in the night season, unlesse he
goe with the Proctors, uppon the payne appointed in the ould Statutes
of the University, which is not meate. And they declare that it is
the auncient custome, that the Proctors shall not goe a _Jetting_,
without the licence of the Vice Chancellor, unlesse it be in Time of
some suddayne danger or occasion."--Cole's MSS. vol. 42, in the British
Museum.
GLOSSARY.
_Those words which occur only in the edition of_ 1557 _are marked with
an asterisk._
_The references are to the Chapters and Stanzas; thus_, 36/23 _means
chapter_ 36, _stanza_ 23. _The usual abbreviations are used_.
Ad, 36/23, _v. imp._ add.
Addle, 51/6, _v._ increase in bulk.--T.R. Icel. _ödlask_ = to gain,
earn. "Adylle, _adipisci, acquirere_--Cath. Anglicum.
Adue, 3/8, _int._ adieu, farewell.
Aduise, 10/41, _s._ care, notice. "Take aduise of thy rent" = make
preparations for paying your rent, by laying by for that purpose.
Afoord, 99/4, _v._ afford.
After claps, 49/_d, s. pl._ disagreeable consequences.
Whane thy frende ys thy foo,
He wolle tell alle and more too;
Beware of after clappes!
--MS. Lansd. 762, f. 100.
After crop, 18/20, _v._ extract a second crop from the land.
Aile, 35/31, _v._ _affects_, is the matter with. A.S. _eglan_.
Aker, 10/14, _s._ acre.
Alexanders, 40/1, _s. pl._ the horse parsley. "_Alexandre_, the hearb
great parsley, Alexanders or Alisaunders."--Cotgrave. See Lyte's
Dodoens, p. 609.
All in all, 4/2, the principal point.
Alley, 15/35, _s._ paths, walk.
Allow, 33/30; Alow, 15/32, _v. pr. t._ recommend, approve of. O. Fr.
_alouer_, from Lat. _laudare_.
Aloft, 33/56, _adv._ up.
Alowe, 115/2, _adv._ low down, deep; cf. 114/23. Cf. "Why somme be
_alowe_ and somme alofte."--P. Plowman, B. Text, xii. 222.
Ambling, 95/2, _adj._ trotting, cantering.
Amends, 10/58, _s._ reparation, amendment.
Amisse, 89/13, _adv._ amiss, wrong.
Amitie, 9/18, _s._ friendship.
Andrew, 48/19, St. Andrew's Day, 30th November.
Among, 1/5, _adv._ at times; 27/4, euer among = constantly, always.
Anker, 13/5, _s._ anchor.
Annis, 45/1, _s._ anise. Lat. _anisum_.
Anoieng, 48/11, _v._ injuring, damaging. O. Fr. _anoier_, from Lat.
_nocere_.
Anue, 10/37, _adv._ anew, again.
Aperne, 17/4, _s._ an apron. Fr. _naperon_, a large cloth, from Lat.
_nappa_. O. Fr. _appronaire_ = a woman's apron; _appronier_ = a
blacksmith's apron. "Barmeclothe or naprun."--Prompt. Parv.
Aqua composita, 91/1, see note E459.
Araid, 48/22, _pp._ kept in order, regulated. O. Fr. _arraier_. A.S.
_gerædan_ = to get ready.
Arbor, 35/45, _s._ an arbour. O. Fr. _herbier_.
Armer, 2/4, _s._ help, assistance.
Arse, 51/4, _s._ buttocks, hind part. A.S. _ears, ærs_.
As, 57/47, which.
Assaie, 1/4, _s._ trial. O. Fr. _assai_.
Asunder, 17/11, _v._ break asunder or in pieces.
Atchiue, 69/1, _v._ finish, complete. O. Fr. _achiever_.
Athit, 16/6, _adj._ (?), "ill-breeders."--Mavor.
Ill-conditioned.--Wright's Prov. Dict.
A too, 17/9, _adv._ in two, asunder.
Attainted, 75/8, _pp._ tainted; the expression "touched" is also in
use. O. Fr. _attaint_, from Lat. _attingere_.
Attonement, 106/11, _s._ atonement.
Auke, 62/13, _adj._ unlucky (_lit._ backward, inverted, confused).
"Awke or wronge, _sinister_."--Prompt. Parv.
Aumbrie, 75/2, _s._ cupboard, pantry. See Prompt. Parv. _s.v._
_Awmebry_. L. Lat. _almonarium_. See also Wedgwood, s.v. _Ambry_.
Auailes, p. 2, _v. pr. t._ is useful or profitable.
Auens, 39/1, _s._ herb bennet--_geum urbanum_. Welsh _afans_. The roots
gathered in the spring and put into ale give it a pleasant flavour.
Auise Avouse, 55/4, "is French jargon for _assure_ yourself, _take
care_."--Mavor.
Auouch, 10/12, _v._ own, acknowledge.
"I'll avouch it to his head."
--Shak. Mids. Night's Dream, i. 1.
Awe, 56/2, _s._ August.
Ayer, 16/20, _s._ air.
Baggage, 21/21, _s._ foul stuff, perhaps from Fr. _bagasse_.
Baggedglie tit, 16/6, worthless beasts, baggagely.
Baies, 81/2, _s. pl._ chidings, reproof. Halliwell has this word,
misspelt _baics_, as from Hunter's additions to Boucher.
Bailie, 10/18, _s._ bailiff, steward. Lat. _bajulus_. Fr. _bailli_.
Baiting, 85/2, feeding, eating.
Balke, 63/2, _s._ "What is in some places called a mier bank, being
narrow slips of land between ground and ground."--T.R. A.S. _balc_.
Welsh _valc_, a strip of land. "A balke or banke of earth ranged or
standing up betweene two furrowes."--Baret's Alvearie. Halliwell, s.v.
Balk, refers to this passage and explains Balke as a piece of timber.
Ball, 95/2, _s._ a common name for a horse. In the Prompt. it is
applied to a sheep, and in the Privy Purse expenses of Henry VIII. p.
43, to a dog.
Band, 56/17, _s._ bands or ropes of straw.
Bandes, 9/24, _s._ bonds, engagements.
Bandog, 10/19, _s._ a dog always tied up on account of his fierceness;
according to Bewick a species of mastiff crossed with a bull-dog. Dutch
_band-hond_.
Bane, 81/6, _s._ poison.
Bane, 46/23, _s._ ruin. A.S. _bana_. O. Icel. _bani_.
Banish, 9/29, _v._ free, clear.
Banket, 28/3, _v. pr. t._ feast, banquet.
Barberies, 34/3, _s._ barberry; _berberis vulgaris_, Linn.
Barberlie, 51/4, _adv._ like a barber.
Bare, 74/6, _adj._ uncouer your bare = strip the clothes off and whip
you.
Barelie, 63/23, _s._ barley.
Bargaine, 16/3, _s._ contract, agreement.
Barth, 33/26, _s._ shelter. "Barth, ground floor, floor."--Spurrell's
Welsh Dict. "A warm place or pasture for calves or lambs."--Ray. "A
place near the farm-house well-sheltered."--T.R.
Bartilmewtide, 57/47, St. Bartholomew's Day, 24th August.
Bassel, 42/1, Bazell, 50/34, _s._ basil, much used in cookery,
especially in France. _Ocymum basilicum_.--Gerard's Herball. So
called probably from its being used in some royal (βασιλικον[Greek:
basilicon]) medicine or bath.
Baulme, 42/2, _s._ balsam, contracted from Lat. _balsamum_.
Bauen, 57/33, _s._ light loose faggots. O. Fr. _baffe_ = a faggot.
"Baven, the smaller trees whose sole use is for the fire."--Skinner.
Bayted, 64*/7, _pp._ baited.
Beare off, 17/2, _v._ ward off, keep off.
Beare out, 16/10, _v._ keep off, protect from.
Beares, 20/1, _v. pr. t._ provides, furnishes.
*Bease, 57, _s. pl._ beasts, cows.
Beastlie, 20/2, _adj._ stupid, careless.
Beath, 23/9, _v._ to place before the fire, to straighten by heating.
Beck, 46/28, _s._ beak.
*Beclip, 30, _v._ anticipate, surprise.
Bedstraw, 19/40, _s._ clean straw.
Beene, 51/22, _s._ property, wealth. Fr. _bien_.
Beere, 96/84, _s._ bier.
Beetle, 22/1, _s._ a wooden club or mallet, its head hooped with iron,
and studded all over with nails, used for splitting wood.
Beggerie, 10/40, _s._ beggary, poverty.
Begilde, 57/27, Beguilde, 10/56, _pp._ cheated, disappointed.
Begon, 99/5, _pp._ begun.
Behoouing, 2/5, _adj._ belonging, proper to.
Bellifull, 46/27, _s._ sufficiency, satisfaction.
Bent, 113/3, _pp._ inclined, disposed.
Beshreawd, 102/7, _pp._ ruined, cursed. Connected with the _shrew_
mouse, to which deadly qualities were at one time attributed.
Bestad, 114/23, _pp._ circumstanced, situated.
Bestowe, 16/34, _v. imp._ place, arrange.
Betanie, 45/3, _s._ the plant Betony, _Betonica officinalis_, Linn.
Betwix, 74/2, _adv._ between. A.S. _betwix_.
Bewraies, 108/4, _v. pr. t._ betrays.
Bex, 37/12, _s. pl._ beaks. Fr. _bec_, pl. _becs_.
Biefe, 21/11, _s._ beef.
Big, 33/36, _s._ teat, pap. A.S. _bige_, a bosom.--Bailey's Dict. 1735.
It also occurs in Gifford's Dialogue on Witches, 1603.
Bil, 17/8; Bill, 33/22, _s._ billhook.
Bilde, 95/6, _v._ build.
Billet, 53/12, _s._ chopped-up wood.
Bin, 107/1, _pp._ been.
Blabs, 100/3, _s. pl._ chatterboxes, talkative persons. "_Cacqueteur,
babillard, baquenaudier, bavard_. A _blab_, a long tongue: one that
telleth whatsoever he heareth."--Nomenclator, 1585.
Blade, 19/14, _s._ blades of grass.
Blaze, 108/4, _v._ spread abroad the report of, blaze abroad. Cf.
Spenser, F. Q., I. xi. 7. A.S. _blæsan_, to blow.
Blenge, 100/3, _v._ blenge, mix.
Blessed thistle, 44/1, _s._ so called from its supposed power of
counteracting the effects of poison; _Carduus benedictus_.
Blew, 43/3, _adj._ blue.
Blindfild, 90/3, _adj._ blindfold.
Blisse, 2/3, _v._ bless, praise.
Block in the fier, 10/57, a block of wood in the fire.
Blocks, 17/11, _s. pl._ blocks of wood, trunks and stumps of trees.
Bloodwoort, 39/4, _s._ bloody-veined dock, _Rumex sanguineus_.
Blouse, 16/37, _s._ red-faced wife or girl. "A girl or wench whose
face looks red by running abroad in the wind and weather is called a
_blouz_, and said to have a _blouzing_ colour. "--Kennett, MS. Lansd.
1033. See also Thoresby's Letter to Ray, E.D. Soc. B. 17.
Blowne, 2/10, _pp._ reported.
Bobbed, 114/5, _pp._ pouting.
Boddle, 51/11, _s._ "a weed like the Mayweed, but bears a large yellow
flower."--T.R. From Dutch _buidel_, a purse, because it bears _gools_
or _goldins_, gold coins, Dutch _gulden_, a punning allusion to its
yellow flowers.
Boies, 57/34, _s. pl._ boys.
Bold, 2/9, _v. pt. t._ embolden, encourage.
Bold, 63/22, _adj._ proud.
Boll, 83/2, _s._ washing-bowl, tub.
Bolted, 67/2, _pp._ sifted, examined. Bolted-bread = a loaf of sifted
wheat meal mixed with rye. See _Bolt_ and _Bolting-cloth_ in Peacock's
Gloss. of Manley and Corringham.
Boollesse, 34/4, _s._ bullace, small tartish plums, black or yellow.
Called in Cambridgeshire "Cricksies." "I believe the word to be Celtic:
Irish _bulos_, a prune, Breton _polos_, a bullace, Gaelic _bulaistear_,
a bullace, a sloe."--Note by Rev. W. W. Skeat. "A bullace, frute,
_pruneolum_."--Manip. Vocab.
Boone, 62/17, _s._ request, prayer.
Boord, 23/12, _s._ boards, planks.
Boorde, 88/1, _s._ the table, meals.
Bootie, 48/14, _s._ booty, prey.
Borough, 33/7, _s._ burrows, warren. A.S. _beorg_, _beorh_.
Botch, 74/5, _v. imp._ patch.
Botles, 43/3, _s._ chrysanthemum. "Boyul or bothule, herbe or Cowslope,
_Vactinia_."--Prompt. Parv.
Bots, 45/22, _s. pl._ a disease (worms) troublesome to horses. Gaelic
_botus_, a bott; _boiteag_, a maggot.
Bottle, 21/15, _s._ the leathern bottle.
Bowd, 19/39, _s._ weevil, _Curculio granarius_; bowd-eaten = eaten by
weevils. "Bowde, malte worme." "Malte bowde or wevyl."--Prompt. Parv.
Bowe, 17/13, _s._ bow.
Bows, 36/12, _s. pl._ boughs, sticks. A.S. _bog, boh._
Brag, 19/14, _s._ boast, sham, pretence; 94/16, value, estimation.
Braggeth, 62/1, _v. pr. t._ boasts, brags. Welsh _bragiaw_. Fr.
_braguer_.
Brake, 15/33, _s._ underwood, ferns, etc. Brakes, "Their light firing
in Norfolk, that is wherewith they bake and brew."--T.R.
Brall, 77/11, _v._ quarrelling, scolding.
Bralling, 101/4, _adj._ brawling, quarrelsome.
Brank, 19/20, _s._ Buck-wheat. _Polygonum fagopyrum_. "_Brance_,
bearded red wheat."--Cotgrave. "_Brance_" occurs in Pliny's Hist. Nat.
xviii. c. 7.
Brats, 81/6, _s. pl._ children.
Brauling, 48/15, _s._ quarrels, contention.
Braue, 94/2, _adj._ fine, grand.
Brauerie, 9/12, _s._ show, boast.
Brawne, 31/2, _s._ brawn, originally the flesh of the wild boar, but
used for flesh generally. O. Fr. _braon, braion_.
Brawneth, 16/22, _v. pr. t._ fatteneth.
Breaching, 2/11, _s._ breaking, breach.
Breadcorne, 19/20, _s._ "leguminous crops."--Wright's Dict.
Breaker, 95/2, _s._ horse-breaker.
Breaketh his credit, 10/37, fails to do what he has promised.
Breakhedge, 15/36, _s._ trespassers and others who break down fences,
or make gaps in hedges.
Breathely, 33/38, _adj._ worthless. See Halliwell, s.v. Bretheling.
Brecke, 16/16, _s._ breach, gap. A.S. _brecan_, to break.
Breede, 10/31, _v._ cause, generate.
Breeders, 12/2, _s. pl._ good time for breeding.
Breeding, 2/10, _s._ origin, source.
Breers, 114/2, _s. pl._ briars, thorns, hence troubles and difficulties.
Bremble, 36/23, _s._ bramble, briar.
Brest, 11/7, _v._ nurse.
Brest, 114/6, _s._ voice. See note E495.
Breth, 107/4, _s._ breath.
Bribing, 10/27, _v._ thieving, stealing. "I _bribe_, I pull, I
pyll."--Palsgrave. See Mr. Skeat's note to P. Plowman, xxiii. 262.
Brineth, 75/8, _v. pr. t._ cure with brine or salt.
Brooketh, 94/10, _v. pr. t._ endures, allows.
Brothell, 10/20, _v._ riotous, dissipated. See Halliwell, _s.v._
Brethel.
Brows, 33/11, feed on, nibble. O. Fr. _brouster_ from _broust_,
a sprout. "Yode forth abroade unto the greenewood to _browze_ or
play."--Spenser, Shep. Cal. May. "_Browse_, or meat for beastes in
snowtyme. _Vesca_."--Huloet.
Brue, 15/33, _v._ brew. A.S. _briwan_.
Brush, 17/14, _s._ underwood, brushwood.
Brushed cote, 49/_b_, a beating; cf. "a dusted jacket."
Buck, 50/13, _s._ buckwheat. Dutch _boekweit_.
Buckle, 96/84, _v. imp._ prepare, get ready; cf. _buckle to_.
Bucks, 74/5, _s. pl._ a quantity of linen washed at once, a tub-full of
linen ready for washing. _Bouckfatt_, a washing-tub (Unton Inventories,
p. 28). Lay your bucks = get your linen ready for washing.
Buglas, 39/5, _s._ bugloss, _Lycopsis arvensis_, Linn.
Buie, 3/8, _v._; Buieng, 56/4, buy.
Bulchin, 33/36, _s._ a bull-calf.
Bullimong, 19/30, _s._ a mixture of oats, peas and vetches, or
buckwheat. Possibly a corruption of Lat. _pulmentum_.
Burch, 92/4, _s._ the rod, birch.
Burrage, 39/7, _s._ borage. _Borago officinalis_. The flowers were
supposed to be cordial and excitative of courage, especially if infused
in wine; whence the derivation Celtic _borr_, pride, _borrach_, a
haughty man.
Burs, 63/16, _s. pl._ the burdock. "_Bourre_, the downe or hairie coat,
wherewith divers herbs, fruites, and flowers are covered."--Cotgrave.
Bushets, 37/19, _s. pl._ small shoots from bushes.
Busht, 42/1, _adj._ thick, spreading.
Buttrice, 17/4, _s._ a farrier's tool used in shoeing horses to pare
the hoofs.
Buttrie, 89/5, _s._ pantry, cupboard.
Buzard, 46/28, _s._ buzzard.
By and bie, 57/15, _adv._ presently.
Cabben, 16/23, _s._ house, sty.
Cace, 67/26, _s._ case, point.
Cadow, 46/28, _s._ jackdaw. "_Cadesse_, Daw, Jackdaw."--Cotgrave.
"Cad-dow, a Jackdaw or Chough, Norfolk."--Bailey's Dict. See note in
Prompt. Parv., s.v. Cadaw.
Calling, 9/1, _s._ station in life.
Camamel, 42/3, _s._ Camomile. Lat. _chamæmelum_. χαμαιμηλον [Greek:
chamaimeilon], earth-apple, from the smell of its flowers.
Campe, 22/24, _v._ to play football. A.S. _camp_ = a contest. See Ray's
Glossary, E. D. Soc. p. xvi.
Campers, 22/24, _s. pl._ football players. See note E133.
Campions, 43/5, _s._ Red Lychnis or Campion, _Lychnis diurna_.
Candlemas, page 84, footnote 5, _s._ 2nd February, so called from
the great number of lights used on that day, being the feast of the
Purification of the Virgin Mary.
Canteth, 94/8, _v. pr. t._ ? scanteth, _i.e._ is economical. The edition
of 1573 reads _franteth_, which is a Somerset word meaning _to be
careful_. Canteth, according to Halliwell, means "divides," _i.e._ does
not use up everything at once, but only what is wanted for the time.
Canuas, 57/54, _s._ canvas.
Capitaine cheefe, 10/19, head or chief captain.
Capon, 31/3, _s._ a castrated cock.
Careles, 35/4, _adj._ unwilling, not anxious.
Carkas, 26/4, _s._ corpse, body. Fr. _carcasse_.
Carke, 114/15, _v._ to be anxious. "I carke, I care, I take thought,
_je chagrine_"--Palsgrave. "Waile we the wight whose absence is our
_carke_."--Spenser, Shep. Cal. November.
*Carnels, 101, _s. pl._ seeds of the haw, briar, etc. Cf. ch. 18. st.
48 and 36. 13.
Carrege, 56/21, _s._ carrying home.
Carren, 18/36, _s._ carrion, carcasses, M.E. _caroigne_. Fr.
_charogne_, from It. _carogna_, Lat. _caronem_.
Carrenly, 19/36, _adj._ rotting, putrifying.
Cart gap, 56/13, _s._ the openings for carts to pass from one field to
another.
Cartwrite, 58/5, _s._ cartwright.
Cast, 10/41, _v._ to count up, reckon.
Cast, 20/3, _v. pr. t._ to clean the threshed corn by casting it from
one side of the barn to the other, that the light grains and dust may
fall out. For this purpose is used a _skuttle_, q.v.
Cast, 33/52, _v. imp._ give over, throw up.
Casting, 65/8, _adj._ that throw up the earth as they burrow through it.
Cater, 10/16, _s._ caterer, provider. "_Cater_ a steward, a
manciple, a prouider of Cates."--Baret's Alvearie. "Cates, dainty
provisions."--Bailey's Eng. Dict. 1737.
Cawme, 56/15, _adj._ calm, settled.
Challenge, 72/1, _v._ claim. O. Fr. _chalenger_.
Champion (title), _s._ plain open country. Fr. _champagne_, from Lat.
_campania_, from _campus_ = a field. "Worstershire, Bedfordshire, and
many other well-mixt soiles, where the Champaigne and couert are of
equall largeness."--G. Markham, Husbandman's Recreations, c. i.
Champions, 16/2, _s. pl._ inhabitants of counties where lands are open
and unenclosed.
Chancing, 9/30, _v._ happening, falling out.
Chapman, 19/27, _s._ bargainer, dealer. A.S. _ceapman_.
Charge, 84/2, _s._ trouble, expense. Compare All's Well that Ends Well,
ii. 3, 121: "She had her breeding at my father's charge."
Charged, 10/8, _pp._ burdened, busy, anxious.
Charges, 23/6, _s. pl._ works, troubles.
Charuiel, 45/4, _s._ the plant Chervil. _Chærophyllum temulentum_,
Linn. Whence A.S. _cærfille_, Fr. _cerfeuil_.
Chaunting, 16/31, _v._ crying, yelling.
Cheanie, 2/6, Jeanie, Jennie.
Cheere, 22/28, _v._ enjoy oneself.
Cheere, 57/26, _s._ enjoyment, merriment.
Chees, 48/20, _s._ cheese. Lat. _caseus_; whence O. H. Ger. _chasi_,
A.S. _cêse_.
Chein, 17/10, _s._ chain.
Cherie, 33/58, _s._ cherry. Lat. _cerasus_; whence A.S. _cirse_, Fr.
_cerise_.
Chikins, 38/33, _s. pl._ chickens, young fowls.
Chinke, 46/27, _s._ money. A word formed from the sound of coin
_jingling_ together.
Chip, 57/32, _s._ wood-choppings.
Chippings, 86/3, _s. pl._ fragments of bread. "_Chapplis_,
bread-chippings."--Cotgrave.
Choised, 57/34, _pp._ selected, chosen. Fr. _choix_, choice.
Chopping, 57/40, _s._ exchange, barter. "Choppe and chaunge,
_mercor_."--Huloet. A.S. _ceapan_.
Churle, 10/50, _s._ an ill-bred, disagreeable person. A.S. _ceorl_, a
freeman of the lowest rank.
Cinqfile, 45/5, _s._ cinquefoil. _Potentilla_, Linn.
Clap, 10/22, _s._ blow, stroke; "at a clap" = at once.
Clapper, 36/25, _s._ a rabbit burrow or warren. "Cony hole or
_clapar_"--Palsgrave. "A _clapper_ for conies, i.e. a heap of
stones, earth, with boughes or such like wherinto they may retire
themselves."--Minsheu. Fr. _clapier_. L. Lat. _clapa_.
Clarie, 39/9, _s._ meadow sage. _Salvia pratensis_.
Clauestock, 17/20, _s._ a chopper for splitting wood.
Cleerely, 16/25, _adj._ clear.
Clicket, 77/9, _v._ chatter. "If I disturb you with my _clicketten_,
tell me so, David, and I won't."--C. Dickens in David Copperfield. "A
tatling huswife, whose _clicket_ is ever wagging."--Cotgrave.
Clim, 56/23, _s._ ? Clement.
Clime, 57/30, _v._ climb. A.S. _climban_.
Clod, 114/37, _s._ earth, hence = landed property.
Clog, 89/1, _s._ charge, duty.
Closet, 14/3, _s._ retirement, seclusion.
Closeth, 62/5, _v. pr. t._ incloses, fences in.
Closier, page 2, _s._ enclosures. Fr. _closure_.
Clot, 33/24, _s._ clods. A.S. _clûd_. "Clodde or clotte lande,
_occo_."--Huloet.
*Cloughted, 89, _pp._ See Clouted.
Clout, 67/16, _s._ piece of cloth. A.S. _clût_, a little cloth. Mid.
Eng. _clout, clutian, clutien_, to patch.
Clouts, Cloutes, 17/10, _s._ an instrument similar to the _plowstaff_,
shod with iron and used for breaking large clods, etc.
Clouted, 17/6, _pp._ "having the Axle-tree armed with Iron
plates."--T.R. O. Fr. _clouet_, dimin. of _clou_, a nail, from Lat.
_clavus_. See Nares, s.v. Clout.
Coast, 63/7, _s._ country, district. O. Fr. _coste_, from Lat. _costa_,
a rib, side.
Coast man, 36/22, _s._ masters of coasting vessels.
Cobble, 74/5, _v. imp._ patch, mend.
Cock, 53/4, _v. imp._ put into cocks, or small stacks.
Cocking, 95/5, _adj._ over-indulgent.
Cockle, 46/13, _s._ the weed corn-rose, _Agrostemma githago_, Linn.
Cockle or Cokyl is used by Wycliffe and other old writers in the sense
of a weed generally.
Cockneies, 92/4, _s. pl._ spoilt or effeminate boys. See note E460, and
Halliwell, s.v. Cockney.
Cocks, 57/16, _s. pl._ small conical heaps of hay or corn.
Codware, 19/26, _s._ all plants that bear pods (or cods); peas, beans,
etc. "Pescodde, _escosse de poix_."--Palsgrave. A S. _codd_. Welsh,
_cod, cwd_, a small bag.
Coeme, Coome, 17/7, _s._ a measure of half a quartern. A.S.
_cumb_.--Somner. "There is no such word in A.S. as _cumb_; it is one
invented by Somner, so that the (so-called) A.S. _cumb_ is really
derived from Eng. _coomb_"--Note by Rev. W. W. Skeat.
Cofer up, 10/61, _v._ to hoard up, lock up.
Cofers, 16/4, _s. pl._ money-boxes.
Cog, 63/14, _v._ cheat, defraud. "Cog a dye, to load a die."--Cotgrave.
"A cogger, _un pipeur_. To cogge, _piper_"--The French Schoolemaster,
1636.
Coile, 4/1, _s._ bustle, hard work; cf. Fr. _cuellée_, a mob, tumult.
Cold, 91/2, _adj._ cooling.
Cole, 57/31, _s._ turf, peat.
Colewort, 39/10, _s._ or collet, cabbage. _Brassica oleracea_, Linn.
Collembines, 43/4, _s. pl._ columbine. Lat. _columbina_, _adj._ from
_columba_, a pigeon, from the resemblance of its nectaries to the
heads of pigeons in a ring round a dish, a favourite device of ancient
artists.--Dr. R. A. Prior.
Comfort, 19/19, _s._ strength, fertility.
Commodities, 37/17, _s. pl._ advantages.
Compact, 112/1, _pp._ composed. Lat. _compactus_, from _compango_.
"Love is a spirit all _compact_ of fire."--Venus and Adonis, 149.
Compas, 47/3, _s._ manure, compost. O. Fr. _compost_, from Lat.
_compositum_.
Compassing, 56/1, _s._ manuring.
*Compast, 11, _pp._ manured.
*Compound, 11, _v. imp._ agree, arrange.
Confer, page 2, _v._ compare. Lat. _conferre_.
Confound, 67/27, _v._ destroy, spoil.
Conie, 15/20, _s._ a term of endearment.
Conies, 63/10, _s. pl._ rabbits. Welsh _cwning_. Irish _coinni_. Lat.
_cuniculus_, cognate with Lat. _cuneus_ (what cleaves, a wedge), and
comes from the Sanskrit root _khan_ = to dig.--Palmer.
Conserue, 91/3, preserve.
Constancie, 9/23, _s._ consistency, firmness.
Conster, 114/34, _v._ understand.
Contemne, 106/7, _v. pr. t._ despise. Lat. _contemnere_.
Continue, 19/35, _v._ to breed from, to keep up stock from.
Contrarie, 67/25, _v. imp._ oppose, contradict.
Cooples, 10/6, _s._ couples, husband and wife.
Coosen, 63/14, _v._ cheat, swindle. Shakespere's _cozen_.
Copie, 47/8, _s._ coppice.
Coresie, 19/24, _s._ annoyance, trouble.
Cornet plums, 34/7, _s._ cornel plums, cornel cherries.
Corneth, 75/8, _v. pr. t._ preserve and season, cure.
Corps, 53/1, _s._ body.
Cost, 32/5, _s._ coast, country. See Coast.
Costmarie, 42/4, _s._ costmary, called also ale-cost, _Balsamita
vulgaris_.
Cote, 58/11, _v._ cogitate, reflect.
Coted, 2/8, _v. pt. t._ took note of, wrote down. "Howe scripture
shulde be _coted_ (quoted)."--Skelton, Colin Clout, l. 758.
Count, 10/21, _v._ reckon, "be to counte" = be of account, be worth.
Counterfait, 64/29, _adj._ counterfeit, sham, false.
Coursest, 55/4, _adj._ coarsest.
Court, 86/10, _s._ account, examination.
Cousleps, 42/5, _s. pl._ cowslips.
Couert, 63/5, covert, underwood.
Couertlie, 9/5, _adv._ closely.
Cowlaske, page 4, _s._ diarrhœa in cattle. See Fletcher's Differences,
1623, p. 33. Laske, _v._ = to _relax_, slacken. See Glossary to
"William of Palerne," E. E. Text Soc. edit. Skeat.
Coxcombe, 64/18; Coxcome, 10/48, _s._ The cap of the licensed fool
had often on the top a cock's head and comb and some of the feathers.
Therefore he "strives for a coxcome" = he will only succeed in proving
his own folly.
Crabs, 15/17, _s. pl._ crab apples.
Cracketh, 10/37, _v. pr. t._ half breaks, injures.
Cradle, 17/14, _s._ "A three-forked instrument of wood, on which the
corn is caught as it falls from the sithe."--T.R.
Crake, 18/21, _v._ brag, boast. Dutch _kraaken_.
Crakers, 54/4, _s. pl._ boasters.
Cram, 114/15, _v._ feed up, satisfy.
Creake, 47/2, "to cry creak" = "to be afraid," "to desist from any
object, to repent."--Halliwell.
Credit crackt, 4/1, credit or trust broken.
Creekes, 49/4, _s. pl._ corners, seek creekes = hide herself.
Creekes, 38/26, _s. pl._ servants.
Creepinglie, 9/32, _adv._ stealthily, by degrees.
Cresies, 40/5, _s._ cress. Fr. _cresson_. M. Lat. _crissomum_ from Lat.
_crescere_, to grow, "a celeritate crescendi."
Crome, 17/19, _s._ "Like a dung-rake with a very long handle."--T.R.
Crone, 56/46, _v. imp._ pick out the crones, i.e. the old ewes. The
meaning is, weed out your flocks.
Crones, 12/4, _s. pl._ "Ewes, whose teeth are so worn down that they
can no longer keep their sheep-walk."--T.R.
Crooked, 57/46, _adj._ deformed.
Croppers, 18/19, _s._ the best or most productive crops.
Croppers, 19/20, _s. pl._ persons who extract crop after crop from the
land.
Crosse, 46/9, _s._ a cross-piece.
Crosse, 9/29, _v._ happen, result unfavourably.
Crosses, 9/29, _s._ troubles, misfortunes.
Crosserowe, page 3, _s._ called also Christcrossrow; the alphabet. "A
is the name of the first letter in the _Crosrowe_."--Baret's Alvearie.
Crotch, 51/10, _s._ "a curved weeding tool."--T.R.
Crotches, 60/11, _s. pl._ crutches. A.S. _cryce_. L. Lat. _croccia,
crucca_. H. Ger. _krücke_.
Crotchis, 57/51, _s. pl._ crooks, hooks. O. Fr. _croche_.
Crowchmas, 50/36, _s._ St. Helen's Day, 3rd May, being the feast of
the Invention of the Holy Cross.
Crowe, 46/9, _s._ crowbar.
Cubboord, 89/5, _s._ cupboard.
Culters, 17/10, _s. pl._ coulters.
Cumbersome, 10/13, _adj._ troublesome, vexatious, oppressive.
Cummin, 45/6, _s._ cumin, a plant resembling fennel, cultivated for its
seeds, which have a bitterish warm taste, and are used like those of
anise and carraway. Arabic _kammûn_. Hebrew _kammôn_.
Cunnie, 36/25, _s._ rabbit.
Currant, 10/44, _adj._ current coin, good coin.
Currey, 64*/2, _v._ gain by flattery. On the origin of this phrase see
"Leaves from a Word-Hunter's Note Book," by Rev. A. S. Palmer, p. 63.
Custome, 77/1, _s._ custom, habit; of custome = as a matter of course.
Curtesie, 9/8, _s._ courtesy, respect.
*Dablith, 27, _v. pr. t._ make wet and dirty.
Dads, 95/5, _s. pl._ fathers.
Daffadondillies, 43/7, _s. pl._ daffodils. _Narcissus pseudonarcissus_,
Linn.
Daieth, 62/8, _v. pr. t._ names some future day for payment, i.e. buys
on credit.
"The moste part of my debtters have honestly payed,
And they that were not redy I have gently _dayed_."
--Wager's Cruell Debter, 1566.
*Dainty, 94, _adj._ difficult, lit. choice, excellent.
Dallops, 54/5, _s. pl._ "A patch or bit of ground lying here and there
among the corn."--T.R. 57/17, "Tufts of corn such as are commonly seen
where dung-heaps have stood too long, or in shady places."--T.R.
Damsens, 34/8, _s. pl._ damsons, contracted from _damascene_ = the
_Damascus_ plum.
Dank, 22/11, _adj._ damp, wet.
Dare, 2/7, _v._ pain, grieve. A.S. _daru_, hurt.
Darnell, 65/1, _s._ darnel, the plant _Lolium perenne_. "Darnell or
Iuraye in Englishe also called Raye."--Dodoens, Newe Herball, 1578.
Darth, 63/24, _s._ dearth, dearness of food, etc.
*Daunger, 90/8, risk.
Daw, 99/2, _s._ simpleton, sluggard.
Day, 57/8, _s._ day-work, time-work.
Dead, 78/4, _adj._ flat (beer). Cf. "Pallyd, as drynke,
_emortuus_."--Prompt. Parv.
Deaw, 56/48, _s._ dew, damp.
Deckt, 106/2, _pp._ adorned, beautified.
Defende, 86/7, _v._ avoid, prevent.
Deintily, 19/37, _adv._ dearly.
Delaide, 66/7, _pp._ tempered, moderated.
Delue, 21/19, _v. imp._ dig. A.S. _delf, delfan_ = to dig, from Goth.
_dailjan_ = to deal, divide. Cf. Ger. _thal_, Eng. _dale_.
Deluing, 36/17, _pr. p._ burrowing.
Depart, 10/56, _v. imp._ give away, part with.
Descant, 68/5, _v._ comment. O. Fr. _deschanter_, from L. Lat.
_discantare_.
Despaire, 57/10; Dispaire, 63/9, _s._ injury, damage.
Despight, 106/12, _s._ despite.
Det, 114/38, _s._ debt.
Detanie, 45/8, _s._ Dittany or Pepperwurt, apparently a corruption of
Lat. _dictamnus_, of which Dodoens says:--"It is fondly and unlearnedly
called in English Dittany. It were better in following the Douchemen to
call it Pepperwurt."--Book v. c. 66. Welsh _Ddittain_.
Dew-retting, 16/25, _s._ steeping flax by leaving it out all night on
the grass. See Water-retting.
Diall, 68/7, _s._ sundial.
Dible, 46/24, _s._ a planting or setting stick, a dimin. of _dib =
dip_ and allied to _tip_ = a sharp point. "_Debbyll_, or settyng
stycke."--Huloet.
Dicing, 10/40, _s._ gambling.
Didall, 17/19, _s._ "A triangular spade, as sharp as a knife, excellent
to bank ditches, where the earth is light and pestered with a sedgy
weed."--T.R.
Dide, 114/11, _v. pt. t._ died.
Digest, 11/4, _v._ quiet, sooth.
Dight, 23/19, _pp._ prepared, treated. A.S. _dihtan_.
Dike, 3/7, _s._ ditch, dike, fence. A.S. _díc_.
Dill, 44/3, _s._ dill. A.S. _dil. Antheum graveolens_.
Dippings, 86/3, _s. pl._ dripping, grease, etc., collected by the cook.
Discharge, 53/3, _v._ relieve you of the trouble.
Discurtesy, 9/19, _s._ incivility, rudeness.
Dispaire, 57/53, _v._ injure, depreciate.
Dissurie, 114/26, _s._ the strangury.
Distaffe, 67/15, _s._ distaff.
Docking the dell, 10/40, dissipation. See Grose's Dict. s.v. _Dock_.
Docks, 17/11, _s. pl._ weeds.
*Dockes, 27, _s. pl._ ?
Dole, 33/16, _s._ share.
Doles, 48/6, _s. pl._ boundary marks, either a post or a mound of
earth; also, a balk or slip of unploughed ground.
Dolt, 33/37, _s._ stupid, fool.
Don, 106/21, _pp._ done.
Doo of, 33/39, _v. imp._ get rid of.
Doong, 19/29, _s._ dung, manure.
Doong Crone, 17/7, _s._ a crook or staff with hooked end for drawing
dung.
Doonged, 53/21, _pp._ dunged, manured.
Doted, 2/8, _v. pt. t._ became foolish, was silly. Fr. _dotter,
radoter_, to dote, rave.--Cotgrave. Cf. Piers Plowman, "Thou _doted_
daffe."
Doughtful, 115/3, _adj._ doubtful.
Douse, 10/7, _s._ strumpet, prostitute; the same word as _Doxy_.
Halliwell, _s.v._ Douce, quotes this passage, and renders _douse_ by "a
pat in the face," but s.v. Dowse he gives the correct meaning.
Dout, 87/7, _s._ danger, risk, difficulty.
Doues, 56/24, _s. pl._ doves, pigeons.
Dowebake, 79/2, _s._ dough, underbaked bread.
Drab, 77/5, _s._ sloven, loose woman.
Dragons, 45/7, _s._ the herb Serpentine, Serpentarie, or Dragonwort.
Dredge, 16/13, _s._ a mixture of oats and barley. "Dragge, menglyd
corne (drage or mestlyon), _mixtio_."--Prompt. Parv. See Note E91.
Drest, 49/8, _pp._ treated.
Dreue, 35/42, Driue, 33/42, _v._ follow you up, press you.
Dreuils, 114/12, Driuell, 79/1, _s._ wasters, spendthrifts.
Drift, 10/13, _s._ end, aim, design, 114/39, course, such drift to make
= to drift along in such a manner.
Drines, 53/20, _s._ dryness.
Drinke corn, 18/24, _s._ barley.
Driping, 35/14, _v._ dripping on, keeping wet.
Driue, 16/20, _v._ drive out of their hives for the purpose of taking
the honey.
Droie, 81/3, _s._ a drudge, servant. See note in Prompt. Parv. s.v.
_Deye_.
Drousie, 89/4, _adj._ the drowsy, the sleepy.
Drout, 14/3, _s._ drought, dry weather.
Drowseth, 62/13, _v. pr. t._ droops, gives way.
Drudge, 7/1, _s._ slave, mean servant.
Duck, 55/6, _s._ docks, dockweed.
Dun, 82/2, _pp._ finished, done for.
Dy, 35/24, _s._ a die, as close as a dy = as close as possible.
Earthes, 35/50, _s. pl._ a ploughing. A.S. _earian_. Lat. _arare_, to
plough. In the Catholicon Anglicum we find "A dayserth or daysardawe,
_juger, jugerum_." See also Ray and Halliwell, s.v. _Arders_.
Easeth, 94/9, _v. pr. t._ indulges, pleases.
Eaw, 67/24, _s._ ewe.
Eb, 14/5, _s._ ebb. A.S. _ebba_.
Ech, 57/23, _adj._ each.
Edder, 33/13, _s._ "Such fence wood as is commonly put upon the top of
Fences and binds or interweaves each other."--T.R.
Edish, 18/4, _s._ stubble after the corn is cut. Roughings. _Edisc_ is
an old Saxon word signifying sometimes _roughings, aftermathes_. See
Glossaries, B 15, B 16, E. D. Soc.
Edmond, St., 20/12, St. Edmund's Day, 20th November.
Eie, 57/9, _s._ eye, attention.
Eiebright, 44/5, _s._ common eyebright, _Euphrasia officinalis_,
formerly much used as a remedy for diseases of the eye.
Eies, 114/4, _s. pl._ eyes.
Eke, 66/6, _adv._ also, too, A.S. _eac, ec_.
Elfe, 114/14, _s._ creature; 86/11, a servant.
Elues, 22/3, _s. pl._ young cattle.
Embraid, 113/7, _v. imp._ upbraid, abuse.
Embrings, 12/6, _s. pl._ the Ember-days, being the Wednesday, Friday,
and Saturday after the first Sunday in Lent, the feast of Whitsuntide,
the 14th September, and the 13th December.
Endiue, 91/2, _s._ endive.
Enuite, 16/32, _v._ invite, call.
Er, 56/21, _adv._ ere, before. Er an = ere than = before that.
Erecting, 1/1, _pr. p._ sustaining, strengthening.
Erie, 57/11; Ery, 18/17, _adj._ every.
Estate, 10/3, _s._ condition, position.
Etch, 36/3, _s._ stubble, edish, q.v.
Exceptions, 19/25, _s. pl._ differences, distinctions.
Exeltred, 17/6, _adj._ furnished with an axle-tree.
Expulsed, 1/4, _v. pt. t._ expelled, drove away.
Extolst, 112/6, _v. pr. t._ praise, extol.
Ey, 99/2, _s._ attention, forgetting his eye = neglecting his duty by
staring or gaping about. See Eie.
Fall, 35/32, _v. pr. t._ are born.
Falleth, 20/1, _v. pr. t._ falls off, loses flesh.
Falt, 35/43, _s._ fault.
Fansies, 2/13, _s._ fancies, whims.
Fare, 2/5, _s._ treatment.
Fare, 33/33, _v._ farrow, litter.
Fare, 10/32, _v._ prosper, fare. A.S. _faran_.
Farnesse, 14/4, _s._ distance, length.
Fasting daie, 10/51, _s._ a day on which it was forbidden to eat food
of any description.
Fat, 18/34, _adj._ fattened beasts.
Fat, 57/54, _s._ vat, vessel.
Fats up, 15/28, _v. pr. t._ fattens up.
Fautie, 99/2, _adj._ faulty.
Fauoreth, 52/24, _v. pr. t._ help, improve.
Fay, 77/4, _s._ faith, word. O. Fr. _fei_.
Feaw, 56/48, _adj._ few, a few.
Feawe, 50/1, _adj._ little time, while. A.S. _feawe_, few.
Fees, 33/12, _s. pl._ pay, reward.
Feft, 114/33, _pp._ enfeoffed, endowed.
Fellowes, 57/9, _s. pl._ companions, mates. O. Icel. _félagi_, a
companion.
Fellowlie, 10/55, _adj._ friendly, neighbourly. Cf.
"Mine eyes ...
Fall _fellowly_ drops."
--Tempest, Act v. sc. i. 64.
See also Abbot's Shaksperean Grammar, § 447.
Fence, 63/2, _s._ defence, protection.
Fenell, 39/13, _s._ fennel. _Fœniculum vulgare_.
Fennie, 35/44, _adj._ mouldy, vinewed. "_Moisi_; mouldy, hoary,
vinowed."--Cotgrave.
Ferme, 10/13, _s._ farm.
Fermer, 19/18, _s._ farmer.
Fetches, 64/2, _s. pl._ tricks, stratagems. Harrison, Descript. of
Eng., has: "it be a vertue to deal without anie suspicious _fetches_,"
p. 115, ed. 1587.
Fetherfew, 43/9, _s._ feverfew. So named from its supposed febrifugal
qualities. A.S. _feferfuge_.
Fetters, 17/21, _s. pl._ chains for the feet.
Fewell, 50/30, _s._ fuel. O. Fr. _fouaille_, from L. Lat. _focale_,
from Lat. _focus_, a hearth.
Fide, 21/21, _pp._ purified, cleansed.
Fie, 20/21, _v._ cleanse. Icel. _fægja_. Cf. Ger. _fegen_.
Fieing, 53/18, _v._ cleaning out. Feying, "Cleaning a Ditch or Pond, so
as the water may come clear."--T.R. See _Fie_.
Fiemble, 55/8, _adj._ a corruption of _female_, the female hemp.
*Fierbote, 65, _s._ the right to take wood for burning. See Peacock's
Gloss. of Manley and Corringham, E.D.S.
Filbeards, 34/9, _s. pl._ filberts. Various derivations have been
given for this word: one, the most probable, from _full_ and _beard_,
referring to the long _beard_ or husk with which it is provided: cf.
Ger. _bart-nusz_ = _bearded nut_.
Filbellie, 10/40, _s._ extravagance in food.
Filchers, 10/54, _s. pl._ pilferers. Scot. pilk = to pick. "She has
pilkit his pouch."--Jamieson.
Filcheth, 63/13, _v. pr. t._ steals, pilfers.
*Fildes, 38, _s. pl._ fields.
Fisgig, 77/8, _s._ a worthless fellow: a light-heeled wench.--Craven.
"A fisgig, or fisking housewife, _trotière_."--Howell, 1660. Still in
use in Lincolnshire.
Fishdaie, 10/51, _s._ a day in which fish is allowed to be eaten, but
no flesh.
Fitchis, 53/11, _s. pl._ tares, vetches.
Fitly, 92/3, _adj._ suitable, fit.
Flacks, 50/16, _s._ flax. A.S. _fleax_. O. H. Ger. _flaks_.
Flaies, 18/3 _s. pl._ flails.
Flap, 85/7, _s._ a stroke with the flail.
Flawnes, 90/5, _s. pl._ "A custard, generally made in raised paste.
Fr. _flan_, a custard or egg-pie." "A _flawne_ or custard."--Baret's
Alvearie, 1580.
Fleering, 64/17, _v. pr. p._ laughing, grinning. "To _fleer_ and
scorn at our solemnity."--Shakspere, Rom. and Jul. i. 5. "I _fleere_,
I make an yvell countenaunce with the mouthe by vncoveryng of the
tethe."--Palsgrave.
Fleming, 37/22, Flemming, 18/37, _s._ Dutchmen, Dutch coasting traders.
Flixe, 18/41, _s._ a flux.
Floted, 49/1, _v. pt. t._ skimmed off the cream. "Flet, as mylke or
other lyke, _despumatus_."--Prompt. Parv. "_Escréme_, fleeted as
milk."--Cotgrave.
*Flotte, 72/_e_, _pp._ skimmed.
Flower, 52/14, _s._ ? floor.
Flower armor, 43/10, _s._ The "floure gentill or purple velvet
floure."--Lyte's Dodoens, p. 168. Fr. _Floramor_, in Cotgrave _la noble
fleur_, from its resemblance to the plumes worn by people of rank.
_Amaranthus tricolor_.
Flower gentle, 43/12, _s._ a species of Amaranth. _Amaranthus spinosa_.
Flower de luce, 43/11, _s._ Iris, or flower-de-luce. Fr.
_fleur-de-lis_. A plant of the genus _Iris_, in particular _Iris
pseudacorus_, the yellow Iris or water flag.
Foison, 35/4; Foizon, 114/37, _s._ plenty. "Foyzon is winter
food."--T.R. Fr. _foison_, from Lat. _fusionem_, from _fundere_.
Cotgrave gives "_Foison_: f. store, plentie, abundance, great
fullnesse, enough." The word still exists in the Scotch _foison_ or
_fusion_, and the adj. _fusionless_ or _fissenless_. Forby explains it
as "Succulency, natural nutritive moisture," as _e.g._ "there is no
_foison_ in this hay."
Foistines, 57/5; Foistnes, 21/5; Foystines, 20/5, _s._ mustiness,
mould. O. Fr. _fust_, a cask, _fusté_, tasting or smelling of the cask,
musty.
Foisty, 19/39, _adj._ musty.
Fondlie, 10/26; Fondly, 67/9, _adv._ foolishly. _Fon_ = to play the
fool. Jamieson, Scott. Dict.
For, 9/9, _prep._ in spite of, regardless of.
For, 9/18. Here and in numerous instances in Tusser _for_ means "for
fear of," "to prevent."
Forbearer, 13/3, _s._ one who refuses.
Forborne, 13/2, _pp._ withheld, refused.
*Forehorse, 94, _s._ one who is always in advance with his work, never
behindhand; the opposite to a procrastinator.
Forke, 22/9, _s._ pitchfork, hayfork.
*Fornight, 51, _s._ a fortnight.
Forrough, 16/15, _s._ furrow. A.S. _furh_.
Foyson, 10/6, _s._ plenty. See Foison.
Fough, 102/5, _interject_, faugh! phew! an exclamation.
Fraid, 2/8, _v. pt. t._ frightened, made afraid.
Fraie, 53/22, _s._ quarrel, fray.
Fraight, 114/24, _s._ freight, cargo.
Frailnes, 10/62, _s._ frailty, uncertainty.
Frame, 57/1, _v._ make.
Framed, 2/15, _pp._ arranged, composed.
Fransie, 88/4, _s._ madness.
Fraud, 62/15, _v._ obtain by fraud.
Fraught, 64/5, _pp._ laden, freighted.
Fray, 77/4, _s._ disturbance, trouble.
Freat, 23/2, _v. imp._ be vexed.
Freat, 51/11, _v._ damage, decay, eat away.
"As doth an hidden moth
The inner garment _fret_."
--Spenser, Faery Queene, ii. 34.
See Wedgwood's Dict. _s.v._ Fret.
Freeseth, 35/1, _v. pr. t._ freezes. A.S. _freosan_. O. Icel. _friosa_.
Dan. _fryse_.
Frier, 86/14, _s._ friar.
Fritters, 90/3 _s. pl._ small pancakes with apples in them. "Frytoure,
_lagana_ (a pancake)."--Prompt. Parv. "A fritter or pancake; a kind of
bread for children, as _fritters_ and wafers."--Baret's Alvearie, 1580.
Froth, 35/3, _adj._ tender, perhaps originally = pulpy.
Frower, 17/8, _s._ a frow, an iron instrument for rending or splitting
laths. Also called _Frommard_.
Fumetorie, 44/7; Fumentorie, 91/3, _s._ Fumitory. _Fumaria
officinalis_, so called from its rank disagreeable smell: formerly used
as an anti-scorbutic: it is called _erthesmok_ [earthsmoke] in MS.
Sloane 5, f. 5.
Furmentie pot, 90/7, _s._ hulled wheat boiled in milk, and seasoned
with cinnamon, sugar, etc. See note E458.
Gadding, 10/51, _v._ going about gossipping.
Gaffe, 22/18, _v._ man, gaffer. "Formerly a common mode of address,
equivalent to _friend, neighbour_."--Halliwell.
Gage, 94/13, _s._ pawn, sweepeth to gage = hurries to pledge or place
in pawn.
*Gage, 53, _v._ assert, maintain.
Galling, 57/31, _v._ causing sore or bare places.
Gallond, 19/42, _s._ gallon.
Gap, 114/20, _s._ an opening, cause.
Gaping, 57/45, _pr. p._ being greedy, grasping.
Garlike, 21/12, _s._ garlic.
Garmander, 42/8, _s._ germander. Fr. _gamandrée_, from Lat. _chamædrys_.
Garson, 33/41, _s._ boy, lad. Fr. _garçon_.
Gasing, 99/1, _pr. p._ gazing, staring.
Gate, 64/17, _s._ walk, gait.
Gayler, 86/11, _s._ guardian, housekeeper.
Geanie, 2/6, _adj._ profitable, useful. A.S. _gægn_, fit, suitable.
Robert de Brunne in his History of England, 3376, has, "a _geiner_ way"
= a more direct advantageous way. Scot. _gane_, fit, useful. Lanc.
_gainest_ way = the shortest cut.
Geld, 15/17, _s._ castrate, spay.
*Gentiles, 17, _s. pl._ gentle-folk.
Gentilie, 9/14, _adv._ kindly, with proper respect.
Gentils, 49/_c_, _s. pl._ gentles, maggots.
Gentlenes, 102/7, _s._ gentlemanly manners.
Gently, 102/7, _adv._ as gentlemen, in a gentlemanly manner.
Gentrie, 114/33, _s._ true nobility.
Gesse, 114/1, _v. imp._ guess, believe.
Gest, 4/2, _s._ a guest. A.S. _gest_.
Get, 9/5, _v._ earn.
Gettings, 9/5, _s._ earnings.
Giddie braine, 10/23, _adj._ giddy, unsteady.
Giles, 114/18, _s. pl._ traps, deceits.
Gillet, 50/30, _s._ lad. Gael, _gille, giolla_, a lad. Halliwell gives
"an instrument for thatching" as the meaning in this passage, but why,
I do not know.
Gillian spendal, 23/18, wasteful, careless housekeeper.
Giloflowers, 15/42, _s. pl._ carnations, pinks. Fr. _giroflée_,
from Lat. _caryophyllus_, a clove, from the clove-like smell of the
flowers.--Wedgwood.
Gin, 10/19, _s._ trap.
Ginnes, 106/22, _s. pl._ means, contrivances.
Ginnie, 90/5, Jenny.
Ginny, 33/38, _s._ a name for a filly. Mavor reads Jilly.
Gise, 97/4, _s._ fashion, way.
Gloues, 57/9, _s. pl._ gloves.
God night, 18/49. A phrase equivalent to "it is all over," "it is too
late."
Goef, 55/4, _s._ the stack or rick.
Goeler, 46/4, _adj._ "The Goeler is the yellower, which are the best
setts, old roots (of hops) being red."--T.R. A.S. _geolewe_.
Gofe, 56/20, _s._ rick, stack. In Addit. MS. 1295, a Lat. Eng. Vocab.
written in Norfolk in the 15th century, occur "_Gelimo_, to golue,
_Ingelimum_, golfe." Palsgrave gives "a _goulfe_ of corne."
Gofe ladder, 17/1, _s._ a ladder for hay ricks.
Gole, 115/3, _s._ goal, prize.
Goom, 33/59, _s._ gum.
Goordes, 41/5, _s. pl._ gourds. Lat. _cucurbita_.
Gossep, 94/7, _s._ gossips, companions.
Got, 114/16, _pp._ caught.
Gotten, 10/4, _pp._ earned, acquired.
Gould, 3/3, _s._ gold, money.
Goue, 57/10, _pp._ laid up in the barn in the straw. Another form
of _Goaf_. "_Goulfe_ of corne, so moche as may lye betwene two
postes."--Palsgrave. Dan. _gulve_ = to lay corn sheaves on the floor,
from Dan. _gulv_, a floor.
Gouing, 57/23, _v._ laying up in the barn in the straw. See Goue.
Graffing, 46/10, _s._ grafting. O. Fr. _grafe_, from Lat. _graphium_, a
pencil, from the resemblance of the graft to a pointed pencil.
Grassebeefe, 12/4, _s._ beef of an ox fattened upon grass.
Grate, 10/29, _s._ prison (grating).
Greaseth, 68/2, _v. pr. t._ bribes, enriches.
Great, 57/8, by great = task or piece-work, in contradistinction to
_day_-work.
Greedie gainfull, 2/13, _adj._ greedy for gain.
Greefe, 89/8, _s._ trouble, worry.
Gregorie, 46/2. St. Gregory's Day, 12th March.
Grinstone, 17/8, _s._ grindstone.
Gromel, 45/9, _s._ the plant Gromwell. _Lithospermum arvense_, Linn.
Grosest, 19/18, _adj._ heaviest, thickest, Fr. _gros_.
Grosse, 18/18, _adj._ coarse.
Grossum caput, 95/1, a blockhead, stupid.
Grotes, 33/46, _s. pl._ money (groats). L. Ger. grot = a large piece
(of money), so called because before this coin was issued by Edward
III., the English had no larger silver coin than the penny.
Gruch, 57/19; Grutch, 86/2, _v._ grudge. O. Fr. _grouchier_, to grumble.
Grutching, 10/8, _s._ grumbling.
Guise, 89/12, *Guyse, 5, _s._ habit, custom.
Gunstone, 10/19, _s._ a ball of stone, used in heavy artillery before
the introduction of iron shot.--Nares' Gloss.
Gutted, 46/4, _pp._ taken off from the old roots.
*Gutting, 27, _v._ cutting up, making ruts in.
Haberden, 23/12, _s._ "that kind of cod which is usually
salted."--Nares. ? Aberdeen haddocks.
Hacking, 53/15, _v._ hewing down, cutting of trees.
Had I wist, 77/8, lit. "had I known:" foole had I wist = foolish and
useless regrets.
*Haft, 60, _v. imp._ "Act like a miser, be a niggard. The sentence
then reads 'Be not niggardly towards God of the goods He sends you.'
_Haft_, to grasp (an extension of the verb _to have_), and hence to
save, be a niggard, is preserved in _hafter_, a miser, saver; which see
in my Notes to P. Plowman, l. 197, p. 117. See nine examples of this
word in Skelton, ed. Dyce, ii. 108."--Note by Rev. W. W. Skeat. The
word, however, seems to bear even a stronger meaning, for Cooper, in
his "Thesaurus," 1584, has "_Cauilla_, a mocke, a scoffe, an haftyng
question, a cauill." The words "haft not to godward" thus may mean "do
not grumble at, find fault with, or question the justice of what God
sends you."
Haie, 63/24, _s._ hay. A.S. _haga_.
Haier, 57/51, _s._ cloth made of goats' hair.
Haile, 15/34, _adj._ sound, strong. A.S. _hæl_.
Hailoft, 89/6, _s._ hay-lofts.
Haithorne, 34/28, _s._ hawthorn. A.S. _hagaþorn_ from _haga_ = hedge,
haw. Ger. _hagedorn_.
Hallomas, 23/1, _s._ the Feast of All Saints. Hallowmas, _i.e._ All
Saints' Day, Nov. 1, was, in Tusser's time, ten days nearer the winter
solstice than now.
Hallontide, 21/1. All Saints' Day, 1st November.
Handsome, 48/18, _adj._ useful, ready, _handy_. A.S. _hand, hond_, the
hand. Prompt. Parv. gives "handsum, _manualis_."
Handsomly, 21/24, _adv._ neatly, trimly.
Hardhead, 71/4, _adj._ hardy, brave.
Hardlie, 10/50, _adv._ with difficulty.
Harlots, 74/4, _s. pl._ tramps, vagrants, or disreputable characters of
either sex. "An harlott, _balator, rusticus_."--Cathol. Anglicum.
Harmes, 16/15, _s._ in harm's way, in danger.
Harolds Booke, 114/11, _s. pl._ the Books of the College of Heralds.
Hart, 19/13, _s._ strength, fertility.
Harted, 48/17, _pp._ provided with a good heart, or, as we should now
say, a good bottom; strengthened.
*Harthe, 65, _s._ hearth.
Hartilie, 10/55, _adj._ hearty.
Hartstong, 45/10, _s._ the Heartstongue, _Ceterach officinarum_, so
called from the shape of the frond.
Hastings, 18/32, _s. pl._ an early variety of peas, "soone ripe, soone
rotten."--D. Rogers' Naaman.
Hauke, 56/44, _s._ hawking, falconry.
Haunt, 67/14, _v._ follow, pursue, be accustomed. O. Fr. _hanter_, to
pursue.
Haunting, 16/31, _adj._ frequenting, in the habit of coming.
Hauocke, 77/3, _s._ havoc, waste.
Hawe, 36/13, _s._ the berries of the hawthorn, hips.
Hawme, 55/14, _s._ haulm, straw. "Haulm, straw left in an esh or
gratten; stubble, thatch. Sax. hælme, _culmus, calamus_. Icel. halmur,
_palea_."--Bish. Kennett's MS. Ray gives "haulm or helm, stubble
gathered after the corn is inned."
Hazard, 23/11, _s._ danger.
Heale, 19/37, _v._ to recover, be cured.
Healthsom, 11/8, _adj._ healthy, invigorating.
*Heare, 41, _s._ hair.
Hearesaie, 2/10, _s._ hearsay, report.
Hearie, 49/7, _adj._ hairy, full of hairs. A.S. _hær._ O. Icel. _här_,
hair.
Heate, 76/2, _pp._ heated, hot.
Heawers, 47/8, _s. pl._ woodcutters. A.S. _heawan_, to cut.
Hed, 89/9, _s._ head, mind.
Hedlonds, 52/17, _s. pl._ headlands.
Hew, 113/1, _s._ colour, "changed hew" = have changed, become
unfavourable.
Hew prowler, 35/25. "Hugh Prowler is our Author's name for a
night-walker."--T.R.
Hid, 2/11, _s._ care, heed. A.S. _hédan_.
Hier, 23/9, _s._ business, duty.
Hight, 114/3, _v. pt. t._ was called, named. O. Eng. _higt, higte_.
A.S. _hâtte_ from _hatan_, to call, name.
Hilback, 10/40, _s._ cover back, _i.e._ clothes, extravagance in dress.
Kennett, MS. Lansdowne 1033.--Halliwell. A.S. _hilan, helan_, to cover.
Hindring, 88/3, _v._ injuring, damaging.
Hir, 35/51, _poss. pr._ their. A.S. _heor_.
Hobbard de Hoy, 60/3, _s._ a lad approaching manhood. "Hober-de-hoy,
half a man and half a boy."--Ray's Gloss.
Hogscote, 17/21, _s._ a pen or sty for hogs.
Holds, 33/40, _v. pr. t._ equals, gains equal.
Holiokes, 43/15, _s. pl._ hollyhocks. A.S. _holihoc_.
Homelie, 1/2, _adj._ plain, homely, unpretending.
Hone, 46/9, _s._ "a common rubber or whetstone."--T.R.
Honie, 106/4, _adj._ sweet.
Horehound, 45/11, _s._ horehound. A.S. _hara-hune_, or possibly a
corruption of Lat. _urinaria_, the plant being considered a sovereign
remedy in cases of strangury and dysuria.
Horselock, 17/21, _s._ shackles for horses' feet.
Horseteeme, 17/10, _s._ team of horses.
Hostis, 10/8, _s. pl._ entertainers.
Housholdry, 9/11, _s._ furniture and articles for domestic use.
Houell, 52/8, _s._ barn, outhouse.
Houen, 49/4, _pp._ swelled. A.S. _hebban, hefan_ (pp. _hofen_), to
heave, raise. O. H. Ger. _hevan_.
Hower, 107/4, _s._ hour.
Howse, 57/32, _v. imp._ house.
Hoy, 57/13, _v. imp._ drag, frighten, drive away by crying, "hoy, hoy!"
Hull, 36/23, _s._ holly.
Huluer, 48/10, _s._ holly. O. Icel. _hulfr_.
Hurtilberies, 34/13, _s. pl._ the hurtle-berry or whortleberry,
bilberry.
Hutch, 10/47, _s._ money chest or box. A.S. hwæca = chest, an
unauthorised (? invented) form, due to Somner. O. Fr. _houche_.
*Iayle, 88, _s._ a gaol, prison.
Ictus sapit, 2/8. Lat. Prov. See Note E15.
Indian eie, 43/16, _s._ the Pink, so called from the eye-shaped marking
of the corolla.
Inholder, 97/1, _s._ innkeeper.
Inned, 23/19, _pp._ saved, housed.
Intreating, 88/5, _s._ treatment.
Inuest, 11/8, _v._ surround.
Ise, 112/2, _s._ ice.
Isop, 42/9, _s._ hyssop. A name assigned in the Authorised Version of
the Bible to the caper.
Ist, 5/3, is it.
Iuie, 50/6, *Iuye, 42, _s._ ivy. A.S. _ifig_.
Jack, 17/20, _s._ a horse or wooden frame upon which wood is sawn.
Jack, 85/10, _s._ a drinking vessel containing half a pint according to
Grose, and quarter of a pint according to Pegge, and Peacock's Gloss.
of Manley and Corringham.
Jade, 17/3, _s._ an ill-tempered horse.
Janting, 87/3, _v._ driving. Cotgrave gives another form of the word
in English. "_lancer un cheval_. To stirre a horse in the stable till
hee sweat withall; or (as our) to iaunt; an old word." "Jaunt" is found
in Romeo and Juliet, ii. 5, 26, "What a _jaunt_ have I had!" and in
line 53 of the same scene:
"To catch my death with _jaunting_ up and down."
Cf. also Richard II. v. 5, 94.
Jarring, 88/3, _s._ quarrelling, scolding.
Jerke, 64*/9, _s._ stroke, blow. See Yerke.
Jet, 114/38, _v._ strut about, walk proudly. Fr. _jetter_.
"Along the streetes as he doth _jetting_ passe,
His outside showes him for an inward asse."
--Rowland's Knave of Hearts, 1613.
Jettie, 68/1, _v._ walk or strut about.
Jobbing, 37/12, _v._ pecking. "As an ass with a galled back was feeding
in a meadow, a raven pitched upon him, and their sate _jobbing_ of the
sore."--L'Estrange's Esop.
John Baptist, 12/4. The feast of St. John the Baptist, 24th June.
Jornie, 57/38, _v. pr. t._ go on a journey, start.
Just, 57/10, _adv._ neatly, trimly.
Karle hempe, 15/24, _s._ the male hemp. See Glossary of Manley and
Corringham (E. D. Soc. No. VI.), by E. Peacock.
Keies, 89/3, _s. pl._. keys, locks.
Kell, 57/51, _s._ hop-kiln.
Kerue, 114/32, _v._ (carve), set out, arrange.
Kest, 11/3, _v. imp._ cast, turn.
Kiffe, 10/30, _s._ kith, kindred, relations.
Kinde, 46/20, _s._ nature, natural way. A.S. _cynd_.
Kirnels, 36/13, _s. pl._ pips, seeds. A.S. _cyrnel_.
Knacker, 58/5, _s._ a cart, collar and harness maker, chiefly employed
by farmers.
Knackes, 86/7, _s. pl._ knickknacks, trifles.
Knap, 85/11, _v. imp._ rap, knock.
Knauerie, 9/13, _s._ roguery, craft, deceit.
Knede, 74/5, _v. imp._ knead. A.S. _cnedan_. O. H. Ger. _chnetan_.
Kniueles, 98/1, _adj._ having no knives. "When knives were not laid for
the guests, as at the present period, they would use their daggers to
carve with, which were harmless as to any other purpose."--Mavor.
Knot, 22/22, _s._ flower-beds laid out in fanciful shapes. See Bacon's
Essay Of Gardens, ed. W. A. Wright, p. 189: "As for the making of
_knots_, or figures, with divers coloured earths, that they may lie
under the windowes of the house, on that side, which the garden stands,
they be but toyes." Compare also Love's Labour's Lost, i. 1, 249: "Thy
curious-_knotted_ garden;" and Milton's Paradise Lost, iv. 242:
"Flowers worthy of Paradise, which not nice art
In beds and curious _knots_, but nature boon
Pour'd forth profuse."
And Shakspere, Richard II. iii. 4, 46.
Knotted, 42/13, _adj._ jointed. "The _knotted_ rush-ringes, and gilte
Rosemaree."--Spenser, Shep. Cal. November.
Lackey, 87/3, servant, messenger.
Lag, 20/15, _v. pr. t._ pilfer, steal.
Lagged, 36/25, _pp._ caught.
Laggoose, 85/4, _s._ laggard, lazy.
Laie, 4/1, 9/32, _v._ plan, intend, purpose.
Laie, 35/46, Lay, 35/48, _s._ untilled land, grass land, lea.
Laier, 63/4, _s._ soil, ground.
Laier, 20/27, _s._ beds, litter.
Lammas, 50/36, _s._ Lammas Day, the 1st August. A.S. _hlâfmaesse_. O.
Eng. _loafmas_, the bread-feast or feast of first fruits.
Lamming, 35/21, _s._ lambing.
Lams, 51/1, _s._ lambs.
Langdebiefe, 39/16, _s._ Wild bugloss. See Mr. Britten's note, E205.
Larkes foot, 43/18, _s._ Larkspur, or Larksclaw. _Delphinium_, Linn.
Lash, 63/20, _s._ dirt, mud; leaue in the lash = leave in the lurch,
or, perhaps, in the snare, trap. See next word.
Lash, 10/15, _s._ the leash in which an animal is caught or held, hence
"to run in the lash" = to fall into the snare.
Lasheth, 23/18, _v. pr. t._ lavisheth, wastes.
Lashinglie, 9/6, _adv._ lavishly, freely.
Lash out, 9/6, _v._ lavish, spend.
Laster, 85/10, _s._ is no laster = will not or does not last, i.e. is
soon broken.
Launders, 83/2, _s. pl._ washers, laundresses.
Lauender cotten, 42/12, _s._ the Garden cypres,
_Chamæcyparissus_.--Lyte's Dodoens, ed. 1578, p. 29.
Lauender spike, 42/11, _s._ spike lavender, _Lavandula spica_, from
M. Lat. _lavendula_, from _lavare_ = to wash, as being the plant used
to scent newly-washed linen, whence the expression of "laid up in
lavender." The essential oil distilled from this plant, which is nearly
allied to the common Lavender, is called in French Essence d'Aspic,
and in English Oil of Spike. It is used in porcelain painting and in
veterinary medicine. See Pharmacographia, p. 430.
Lawe, 56/2, _s._ rule, for a lawe = as a rule.
Laxe, 19/41, _s._ looseness, diarrhœa. See Cowlaske.
Lay, 10/60, _v. pr. t._ plan, try.
Lay land, 33/49, _s._ untilled lands. "Lay lande, _terre nouvellement
labourée_."--Palsgrave.
Lead, 56/14, _s._ a cauldron, copper, or kettle. Gaelic _luchd_ =
a pot, kettle. "That stemede as a forneys of a _leede_."--Chaucer,
Prologue to C. T. l. 202. "Make þe broys in þe _led_."--Havelok, ed.
Skeat, 924.
Lease, 33/49, _s._ a pasture. "A lease is a name used in some
countries for a small piece of ground of two or three acres."--T.R.
O.E. _leswen_, to pasture, from A.S. _læsu_, a pasture, _lǽswian_, to
pasture.
Leaueled, 46/7, _pp._ levelled, measured.
Leauens, 89/10, _s. pl._ the barm and meal laid together for
fermentation: _to lay the leavens or leavance_ = to put them together
for that purpose. See Halliwell, s.v. Leavance.
Leese, 56/47, _v. imp._ lose, miss.
Leete, 86/10, _s._ a manor court.
Lemmans, 40/2_a_, _s. pl._ lemons. Arabic _laimûn_.
Lent stuffe, 63/36, _s._ provisions for Lent.
Lesse, 2/8, _s._ lease, term. Fr. _lais, laissement_, the lease or
instrument by which a holding of any kind is let (_laissé_) to a tenant.
Let, 57/50, _s._ hindrance, obstacle.
Letted, 23/2, _pp._ hindered, delayed.
Lettis, 39/18, _s._ lettuce. Lat. _lectuca_, from Greek γαλὰ [Greek:
gala] gen. γάλακτος [Greek: galaktos], milk, and ἔχω [Greek: echo], to
contain, through _lattouce_, an older form (still retained in Scotland).
"Letuce of lac derivyed is perchaunce;
Ffor mvlk it hath or yeveth abundaunce."
--Palladius on Husbondrie, E. E. Text Soc. ed. Lodge, 51/216.
Leuer, 50/9, _adv._ sooner, rather. A.S. _leofer_.
Lick, 23/6, _v._ lick themselves.
Licoras, 45/13, _s._ liquoras.
Licour, 22/23, _s._ water, drink.
Lide, 114/3, _v. pt. t._ lay, was situate.
Lie in the dust, 10/32, cease, be done away with.
Lieng alonge, 19/25, lying at a distance.
Linage, 114/3, _s._ lineage, family.
Lightly, 46/20, _adv._ easily.
Likest, 35/34, _adj._ most likely, promising.
Lillium cum-vallium, 43/20, _s._ Lily of the valley, or Lily-convally.
Lat. _Lilium convallium_, a name taken from Canticles ii. 1, "I am the
lily of the valleys."
Line, 17/5, _s._ rope (?).
Ling, 57/36, _s._ a fish (_Lota molva_) resembling a cod, but longer
and more slender. When salted, it is extensively used for food in
Scotland and Ireland. Fr. _lingue_, O. Dutch, _linghe_.
Linne, 97/3, _s._ the town of Lynn. "To purchase Lynn" seems to
have been a proverbial mode of expression used in ridicule of
stinginess.--Mavor.
Linnen, 94/13, _s._ linen.
Litherly, 85/8, _adj._ lazy, idle.
Lively spide, 3/2, quickly seen.
Liuerwort, 39/20, _s._ so called from the _liver_ shape of the thallus.
Lyte (Dodoens, ed. 1587, p. 411) tells us it is "a sovereign medicine
against the heate and inflammation of the liver."
Loiterers, 2/6, _s. pl._ hangers on, dependents.
*Lone, 10, _s. pl._ a loan, grant from God.
Longing, 16/10, _s._ desire, what it requires.
Longwort, 39/19, _s._ lungwort, _Pulmonaria maculosa_.
Looke, 5/1, 10/4, _v._ look for, seek, expect.
Loose, 57/22, _v. pr. t._ lose, waste.
Lop, 33/13, _s._ the faggot wood of a tree.
Lordlie, 113/3, _adv._ to live in a lordly or grand style.
Losels, 63/12, _s. pl._ worthless, abandoned fellows. Prompt. Parv. has
"Lorel or losel, or ludene, _lurco_."
Louage, 45/12, _s._ Lovage. _Ligusticum Scoticum_, Linn.
Lowe, 23/24, _adj._ not advanced, if Spring is taken to mean the
_season_; or, not grown up, if Spring is the _young grass_.
Lowe, 63/11, _adv._ low, feeding so lowe = to allow the flocks to eat
the pasture too low or short.
Lower, 20/17, _v._ scowl, look discontented.
Lubberlie, 9/16, _adj._ lazy, idle. "Thither this lusking
_lubber_ softly creeped." _Tom Tel Troth's Message_, New Shak.
Soc. ed. F. J. Furnivall, p. 128. "_Baligaut, m._ an vnweldie
_lubber_, great lobcocke, huge luske, mishapen lowt, ill-fauoured
flabergullion."--Cotgrave.
Lubbers, 57/22, _s. pl._ louts, awkward fellows. Welsh _llob_ = a heavy
lump, _llabi_ = a looby. Gaelic _leobhair_ = a lubber.--Wedgwood.
Lug, 87/4, _v._ drag, draw.
Lurched, 23/3, _pp._ robbed of their food, being left in the _lurch_.
Lurching, 88/7, _s._ greediness. L. Lat. _lurcare_, to swallow food
greedily. "To _lurch_, devour, or eate greadily, _ingurgito_."--Baret's
Alvearie. Cf. Bacon's Essays, xlv.
Lurke, 86/1, _v._ idle, loiter about.
Lurketh, 62/9, _v. pr. t._ lounge, dawdle about. The same as Lusk.
Harman, p. 82, speaks of "lewtering luskes and lazy lorrels."
Lust, 15/10, _s._ desire.
Lustie, 60/5, _adj._ strong, lusty.
Mads, 50/4, _s. pl._ maggots, worms. Another form of _moth_.
Magget the py, 49/9, the magpie. See note E300.
Maides, 90/3, _s. pl._ maidens, girls.
Maierom, 42/13, _s._ marjoram, from Lat. _majorana_, with the change of
_n_ to _m_, as in "Holm, Lime," etc.
Maine, 19/17, _adj. = meint_, i.e. _mixed_ wheat. See _Mung_ or
_muncorn_ in Halliwell.
Mainecombe, 17/3, _s._ a comb for horses' manes.
Maine sea, 14/4, the ocean, the high sea. Cf. the expression "the
Spanish main."
Male, 102/4, _s._ mail-bag, portmanteau, or sack.
Mallow, 33/6, _s._ the field mallow.
Mams, 95/5, _s. pl._ mothers, mammas.
Manerly, 85/11, _adj._ polite, decent.
Mar, 95/2, _v._ spoil, ruin.
*Marefoles, 53, _s. pl._ fillies.
Marke, 17/17, _s._ marking tool.
Marres, 20/14, _v. pr. t._ spoils, interrupts.
Marrow, 57/40, _s._ a mate, companion. "Marwe, or felawe yn trauayle
or mate, _socius, compar, sodalis_."--Prompt. Parv. See Towneley
Mysteries, p. 110, and quotations in Craven Glossary and Jamieson.
Marsh men, 17/19, _s. pl._ farmers in the fen and marshy country.
Martilmas, 12/3. The feast of St. Martin, 11th November. See Note E60.
Mast, 63/5, _s._ the fruit of the oak and beech and other forest trees.
A.S. _mǽst_. Ger. _mast_, from Gothic _matan_, to nourish.
Mastlin, 63/23, _s._ mixed corn. See Mestlen.
Mates, 114/30, _s. pl._ companions.
Mawdlin, 49/_c_, _s._ Magdalene.
Mawdelin, 42/14, _s._ Maudlin. _Balsamita fæminea_.--Gerard's Herball.
Meade, 63/3, _s._ meadow. A.S. _mǽd, meadu_, genitive, _meadewes_.
Meake, 17/14, _s._ "a hook at the end of a handle five foot
long."--T.R. "A _meag_ or _meak_, a pease-hook."--Ray. Also in Coles'
Dict. 1676.
Meane, 114/25, means, help.
Meanie, 2/6, _adj._ many.
Measling, 16/23, becoming measly. "_Masyl_ or _mazil_,
sekenesse."--Prompt. Parv.
Measure, 68/9, _v._ be moderate, be within measure.
Meated, 17/12, _pp._ fed.
Meateth, 62/7, _v. pr. t._ feeds, supports.
Medcin, 33/19, _s._ medicine.
Meedeful, 87/7, _adj._ thankful.
Meedes, 106/4, _s. pl._ meadows. See Meade.
Mendbreech, 89/6, _s._ one who sits up late at night to mend his
clothes.
Mercurie, 39/22, _s._ Mercury, or Good King Henry, is largely grown by
cottagers in Lincolnshire. This plant, the _Chenopodium bonus henricus_
of botanists, bears tender young leaves resembling spinach, which, when
cooked, are but little inferior in flavour to the finest asparagus.
It is a robust-growing perennial, and, when once planted in deep,
rich soil, requires no further cultural attention than a dressing of
well-decomposed manure during the winter.
Mestlen, 37/21, _s._ a mixture of wheat and rye. "Mastilȝone,
_bigermen, mixtilio_."--Cath. Ang. "_Framois_, meslin of oats
and barlie mixed." "_Meteil_, messling or misslin, wheat and rie
mingled."--Cotgrave.
Mew, 36/26, _s._ a cage for moulting.
Michel, 33/32, Mihel, 57/25, Mihell, 12/4, _s._ Michaelmas. The feast
of St. Michael and All Angels, 29th September.
Michers, 10/15, _s. pl._ lurking thieves, skulkers. "Mecher, a lytell
thefe, _laronceau_."--Palsgrave. Now common as a term for a truant.
Cf. Shak. I Henry IV. ii. 4: "Shall the blessed sun of heaven prove a
_micher_ and eat blackberries."
Mickle, 68/1, _adj._ great, much.
Mier, 107/4, _s._ mire, filth. A.S. _myre._
*Mier, 38, Mierie, 114/27, _adj._ filthy, muddy.
Mihelmas, 57/44, Michaelmas.
*Millons, 72/_c, s. pl._ melons. See Musk Million.
Mind, 68/5, _v._ notice, comment on.
Mind, 63/1, _v. pr. t._ intend, have in mind, wish.
Minion, 66/4, _adj._ pleasant, agreeable, favourite. Fr. _mignon_. L.
Lat. _mignonetus, gratissimus, minna,_ love.
Minnekin, 10/20, _adj._ little, perhaps with the idea of the modern
contracted form "minx."
Miring, 23/3, _v._ being stuck in bogs.
Mis, 16/8, _v._ want, be without.
Mischiefe, 23/4, _v._ hurt, injure.
Mischieued, 10/36, _adj._ unfortunate, ruined.
Misdeeme, 30/3, _v._ misjudge. A.S. _deman_, to judge.
Mislike, 23/16, _v._ displease, not suit.
Mistle, 33/12, _s._ mistletoe. A.S. _mistel_. O. H. Ger. _mistil_.
Mitch, 17/17, _adj._ large.
Mite, 63/20, _s._ the smallest piece. A.S _mite_.
Mo, 33/57, _adj._ more, others. A.S. _mâ_.
Moether, 17/13, Mother, 16/14, _s._ a girl. A woman and her mawther = a
woman and her daughter. "Moder, servaunte or wench."--Prompt. Parv.
Mogwort, 45/15, _s._ mugwort, _Artemisia vulgaris_, Linn.
Moile, 4/1, _v._ to work hard, drudge. Lat. _moliri_, to struggle. "In
the earth we _moile_ with hunger, care and paine."--Mirror for Magist.
ed. 1610.
Molding, 55/4, _v._ becoming musty, or mouldy.
Mome, 62/3, _s._ blockhead, fool. "A gull, a ninny, a _mome_."--Florio,
p. 81. "A youth will play the wanton, and an olde man proove a
_mome_."--Drayton, Skeltoniad.
Mone, 67/1, _s._ complaint, lamentation.
Mooueth, 94/7, _v. pr. t._ moves or exerts herself, plans.
Mother, 16/14, _s._ a girl. See Moether.
Moulspare, 17/18, _s._ mole spear.
Mow, 17/19, _s._ stack of hay or corn. A.S. _muwa_. L. Lat. _mugium_.
Mowles, 36/17, _s. pl._ moles.
Mowse, 38/3, _v. pr. t._ mouth, bite.
Mowth, 57/25, _v._ eat.
Muck, 51/13, _s._ manure.
Mulley, 57/46, a common name for a cow in Suffolk.
Mungrels, 46/3, _s. pl._ cur dogs, mongrels. A.S. _menegan_, to mix,
hence an animal of a mixed breed, a hybrid.
Musk Million, 40/8, _s._ the musk melon. "Pickled cowcombers I have
bought a pecke for threepence, and _musk mellions_, there hath beene
cast five or sixe loads of them in one day to their hogs."--Taylor's
Works, 1630. See Lyte's Dodoens, p. 590.
Myslen, 16/11, _s._ mixed corn. Mestlyone or monge corne or
dragge.--Prompt. Parv. See Dredge and Mestlen.
Nads, 17/9, _s._ an adze.
Naile, 17/8, _s._ nails.
Nall, 17/4, _s._ an awl.
Naughtie, 53/20, _adj._ useless, unfit.
Naughtly, 10/4, _adv._ by unfair or improper means.
Nauewes, 41/6, _s. pl._ wild navew. _Brassica napus_, L. Fr. _naveau_,
from _napellus_, dimin. of _napus_ = the rape.
*Nawlt, 32, ? _nawt_, nothing.
Neat, 50/28, _s._ cattle. A.S. _neât_, horned cattle.
Neatherd, 63/2, _s._ herdsman, the man who attends to the cattle.
Needams shore, 97/5. "A punning proverb recorded in Ray; and signifying
that waste and extravagance bring a man to want or need."--Mavor.
Needfullie, 9/15, _adv._ necessarily.
Ne forte, 23/10, Latin, lest by chance.
Nep, 39/24, _s._ cat mint, a contraction from the Lat. _nepeta_.
Nest, 11/6, _v._ nestle, settle.
*Nestling, 41, _v._ harbouring, supporting.
Nettie, 68/1, _adj._ natty, neat. O. Fr. _net_, from Lat. _nitidus_.
Nice, 102/1, _adj._ careful, particular.
Nick, 98/4, _v._ cut, notch.
Nie, 16/4, _adj._ near, convenient.
Nips, 114/5, _s. pl._ pinches.
Niggerly, 27/4, _adj._ niggardly, miserly. Icel. _hnöggr_, sparing,
miserly. Cf. Ger. _knicker_, a niggard.
Nittes, 21/23, _s. pl._ the eggs of a louse or other insects. A.S.
_hnitu_.
Noble, 16/16, _s._ noble, a gold coin of the value of 6_s._ 8_d._
Noddies, 18/20, Nodie, 98/4, _s. pl._ simpletons, fools.
"Ere you come hither, proove I was somebody,
The king delighted in me, now I am a _noddy_."
--Damon and Pythias, i. 174.
Noe, 7/4, _s._ Noah.
Noiance, 16/8, _s._ injury, trouble.
Noie, 52/15, _v. pr. t._ are injurious, noxious.
Noieth, 57/13, _v. pr. t._ suffer harm or injury.
Noisome, 10/8, _adj._ injurious, damaging.
Norfolk wiles, 114/18, "Essex miles, Suffolk stiles, Norfolk wiles,
many men beguiles."--Old East Anglian saw. See note E500.
Nowles, 36/17, _s. pl._ the hillocks, little mounds. A. S. cnoll,
_cacumen_. "Nolle, _idem quod_ nodul."--Prompt. Parv.
Noy, 53/15, _v._ hurt, are injurious. See Noie.
Noyer, 13/2, _s._ one that hurts or injures.
Nurteth, 20/28, _v. pr. t._ poke or push with the horns.? connected
with Fr. _nuire_, Lat. _nocere_. Halliwell quotes from Gawayne _nirt_ =
a cut, hurt.
Nurture, 10/57, _s._ training.
Of, 106/12, _prep._ through, in consequence of.
Of, 106/2, _prep._ out of, from.
Of, 19/22, _prep._ after.
Of, 64*/4, _prep._ with, by means of.
Ofcorne, 86/5, _s._ offal or waste corn.
Office, 99/2, _s._ duty. Lat. _officium_.
Oke, 19/31, _s._ oaks. A.S. _Æc_.
Ope gap, 16/36, hedge or fence breakers.
Open, 16/38, _v._ bark, open his mouth.
Opprest, 19/29, _pp._ troubled, laden.
Opte, 114/22, _v. pt. t._ opened.
*Or and, 18, before. Cf. Er an.
Orach or Arach, 39/26, _s._ Orach. _Atriplex sativa alba. Atriplex
sativa purpurea_.--Gerard's Herball, ed. 1633.
Orderlie, 9/8, _adv._ in due order.
Orengis, 40/4_a, s. pl._ oranges. Arabic, _nârandj_. L. Lat. _arantia_,
from its first title, _pomum aurantium_, golden apple.
Otemell, 46/26, _s._ oatmeal. A.S. _âta_, oat, and _mæl_, meal.
Otes, 46/13, _s. pl._ oats.
Othing, 94/6, one thing.
Out, 16/17, _adv._ outdoor, open air.
Ouercome, 53/4, _v._ manage, keep up with.
Ouerly, 23/21, _adv._ all over.
Over reaching, 2/11, cheating, deceiving.
Ouerthwart, 46/9, _prep._ across. A.S. _oferþweorh_. O. Eng. _outhwar,
thweorh_. O. Norse, _thwert_.
Ox bowes, 17/10, _s. pl._ the bow of wood which goes round the neck of
an ox.
Oxboy, 63/15, _s._ the boy who attends to the cattle.
Oxteeme, 17/10, _s._ team of oxen.
Oxyokes, 17/10, _s. pl._ yokes for oxen.
Pad, 17/21, _s._ padlock.
Paggles, 43/25, _s. pl._ cowslip, primrose, paigles. In Suffolk the
_Cuckoo flower_. See note E232.
Paier, 17/13, _s._ pair, couple.
Paine, 3/1, _s._ pains, trouble.
Painfull, 77/15, _adj._ painstaking, careful.
Painfull, 2/13, _adj._ full of trouble, requiring care.
Painted, 5/3, _pp._ adorned; the _sermo ornatus_ of Cicero.
Paltrie, 57/30, _adj._ poor, worthless.
Panel, 17/5, _s._ a pannier. A _pannel_ and _ped_ have this difference:
the one is much shorter than the other, and raised before and behind,
and serves for smaller burdens; the other is longer and made for
Burdens of Corn. These are fastened with a leathern Girt called a
Wantye.--T.R.
Parasites, 10/27, _s. pl._ flatterers, hangers on.
Pare, 2/7, _v._ injure, damage, impair.
Pared, 46/4, _pp._ cleaned and cleared of all superfluous roots.
Partition, page 2, _s._ division.
Pas, 48/6, _v. pr. t._ care. "As for these silken-coated staves, I
_pass_ not."--Shakspere, 2 Henry VI. iv. 2.
Pask, 46/2, _s._ Easter. Lat. _Pascha_.
Passeth, 102/3, _v. pr. t._ think, reflect. See Pas.
Pasties, 90/7, _s. pl._ pies.
Patch, 51/32, _s._ originally a fool, jester, here = the farm labourer.
Ital. _pazzo_, which Florio ("New Worlde of Wordes") defines as
"foolish, fond, mad, rash, doting, rauing or simple. Also a foole, a
gull, an idiot, a mad man, a naturall." By some, however, it is derived
from the _patched_ or motley coat of the jester.
Patches, 53/2, _s. pl._ places where the shearer has cut the skin of
the sheep, wounds.
Pates, 63/9, _s. pl._ persons.
Pauncies, 43/24, _s._ pansies, heartsease. "There's _pansies_, that's
for thoughts."--Shakspere, Hamlet, iv. 5.
Pay, 77/11, _v._ pay home = give a strong, sharp blow.
Peake, 67/27, _v._ to look thin or sickly, "Dwindle, _peak_ and
pine."--Shakspere, Macbeth, i. 3.
Pearch, 87/5, _v._ perch, roost.
Peasebolt, 18/38, _s._ "pease in the Hawm or Straw."--T.R.
Peaseetch, 19/5, _s._ the aftermath of a crop of peas. See Etch.
Peasefed, 18/27, _adj._ fed on peas.
Peason, 53/9, _s. pl._ pease.
"Prick _peason_ and beanes, if thy garden be dry,
At change of the moone, and in beautiful skye."
--Almanack, 1615.
Peccantem, 35/28. See note E178.
Peck, 17/12, _s._ a peck measure.
Ped, 17/5, _s._ a pannier, a large capacious basket, in which fowls,
eggs, fish, etc., are hawked about the country. Peder, a small farmer
(Lincoln), "Pedde, idem quod panere, _calathus_."--Prompt. Parv.
"Pedder, _revolus, negociator_."--Cathol. Anglic. See also Halliwell,
sub. voc.
Peeces, 2/7, _s._ pieces, in parts.
Peele, 75/6, _v._ strip. "_Peler_. To bauld, or pull the haire off;
also to pill, pare, barke, unrinde, unskin."--Cotgrave.
Peeler, 35/51, _s._ an impoverisher.
Peeling, 33/51, _s._ impoverishing.
Pelfe, 55/1, _s._ apparatus, implements.
Peneriall, 39/29, _s._ penny-royal. _Mentha pulegium_, from Lat.
_puleium regium_, through Dutch _poley_, in the old Herbals called
_puliol royal_; its Latin name being derived from its supposed efficacy
in destroying _fleas_ (_pulices_). See Pliny (b. xx. cap. 54).
Penie, 2/13, _s._ penny, money.
Penurie, 9/6, _s._ destitution, want.
Perareplums, 34/18, _s. pl._ some variety of plum either lost or
unknown (if not a misprint).
Perceley, 39/28, _s._ parsley. A.S. _peterselige_. Lat. _petroselinum_.
Percer, 17/6, _s._ a piercer, gimlet.
Perie, 18/48, _s._ perry.
Perle, 96/28, _s._ pearl, jewel, ornament.
Perseneps, 41/8, _s. pl._ parsnips. Spelt in the old herbals _Pasnep_
and _Pastnip_, from Lat. _pastinaca_.
Pester, 48/14, _v._ overcrowd with stock, abbreviated from O. Fr.
_empestrer_ = to entangle the feet or legs, to embarrass, from Fr.
_pasturon_, L. Lat. _pastorium_, a fetter by which horses are prevented
from wandering in the pastures.
Pestring, 53/11, _v._ being in the way or troublesome. "_Empestrer_, to
pester, intricate, intangle, trouble, incomber."--Cotgrave.
Petigree, 114/11, _s._ pedigree, genealogy.
Pewter, 85/11, _s._ pewter vessels.
Philip and Jacob, 51/1. The feast of Saints Philip and James, 1st May.
Phraies, 114/8, _s._ phrase, language.
Pickle, 56/17, _s._ condition, state.
Piddling, 63/48, _v._ "going about pretending to work but doing little
or nothing, as after illness a man is said to go _piddling_ about,
though as yet unable to do much."--Halliwell.
Pie, 53/3, _s._ magpie.
Piggen, 16/14, _s._ pigeons.
Pike, 17/15, _s._ a pitching fork with two or three prongs for cocking
corn not put into sheaves.
Pilch, 15/39, _v. pr. t._ pilfer. See also Filchers.
Pilcrowe, page 2, _s._ the mark ¶. "Pylcrafte in a booke,
_asteriskus_."--Prompt. Parv.
Pilferie, 9/4, _s._ theft, fraud. O. Fr. _pelfrer_, to plunder.
Pinched, 10/30, _pp._ in straitened circumstances, in need or want.
Pinching, 9/6, _adj._ extreme, pressing.
Pinching, 97/3, _s._ economy.
Pinwood, 17/20, _s._ pegwood, _i.e._ wood that does not split, for
making wooden pins or pegs of.
Pionées, 45/16, _s._ pl. The peony. _Pæonia corallina_. The seeds of
this plant were used as a spice, and also as a medicine. See note in
Liber Albus, p. 351.
Pismier, 111, _s._ ant.
Pitch and pay, 114/24, pay ready money.
Placing, 56/32, _v._ arranging, stacking.
Plagards, 114/6, _s. pl._ commissions, instruments.
Planked, 17/2, _pp._ boarded.
Plantine, 44/10, _s._ Plantain. The Water-plantain was formerly
regarded as a specific against hydrophobia: from _planta_, sole of the
foot, from the shape of the leaf.
Plash, 36/15, _v. imp._ lower and narrow a broad-spread hedge by
partially cutting off the branches and entwining them with those left
behind. "_Plesser_, to plash, fould, to bow, or plait young branches
one within another; also to thicken a hedge, or cover a walke, by
plashing."--Cotgrave. In 36/15 it means to _pleach_ down a hedge over
the burrow, so as to protect it.
Pleasure, 7/6, _v._ to please.
Plight, 16/34, _s._ condition.
Plot, 9/7, _s._ piece of ground, farm.
Plot, 12/1, _s._ plan, rule.
Plough Monday, 90/2. The Monday next after Twelfth Day. See note E452.
Ploughstaff, 17/11, _s._ an instrument like a paddle for cleaning a
plough, or clearing it of weeds, stalks, etc.
Plowmeat, 47/12, _s._ food made of corn.
Plowwrite, 58/5, _s._ plough wright.
Plump, 19/41, _v. imp._ throw in.
Pod, 17/6, _s._ "a box or old leather bottle nailed to the side of the
cart to hold necessary implements, or perhaps grease."--Mavor. Cf. Ped.
Poke, 16/3, _s._ a bag, sack, "buy a pig in a poke" = to buy without
seeing what one is buying.
Poling, 35/45, _s._ supporting with poles.
Pollard, 19/16, _s._ a mixture of bran and meal.
Pollenger, 35/13, _s._ pollard trees, brushwood.
Pompions, 41/7, _s. pl._ pumpkins. Fr. _pompon_.
Poppie, 45/17, _s._ poppy. A.S. _papig_.
Poret, 39/31, _s._ a scallion; a leek or small onion. O. Fr. _porette_.
Lat. _porrum_; called _Porrectes_ in the Forme of Cury, p. 41.
Porkling, 19/34, _s._ young swine. Cf. _Bulchin_, q.v.
Posie, 97/1, _s._ a poetical inscription. Udal writes it _poisee_.
"There was a superscription or _poisee_ written on the toppe of the
crosse."--St. Luke, c. 23.
Pot, 15/43, _s._ the pot for cooking purposes.
Pottage, 76/2, _s._ pottage, soup. Fr. _potage_.
Pottle, 21/12, _s._ a pottle, a measure of two quarts.
Pouch, 62/16, _s._ pocket, purse. A.S. _pocca_.
Poucheth, 35/46, _v. pr. t._ pockets.
Pound, 114/21, _v._ fight, beat.
*Powlinges, 66, _s. pl._ the branches or shoots of pollard trees.
Still called _Pollengers_.
Practise, 73/13, _s._ practice, experience.
Practisie, 9/5, _s._ conduct, practices.
Praies, 114/18, _s._ praise.
Prating, 64/27, _s._ talking, chattering.
Pray, 114/25, _s._ prey, booty, plunder.
Preferment, 10/57, _s._ advancement, assistance.
Prentise, 92/4, _s._ apprenticeship, business.
Prentiships, 60, _s. pl._ periods of seven years, that being the
duration of an apprenticeship, or 'prenticeship.
Prest, 56/43, _adj._ ready.
Prest, 63/7, _adj._ neat, tidy. Tusser Redivivus says, "An old word for
Neat or Tight; I suppose comes from women being _strait-laced_." Ital.
_presto_. O. Fr. _prest_, Fr. _prêt_.
Prest, 49/8, _pp._ pressed. Fr. _presser_.
Pretie, 86/7, _adj._ pretty, dainty. A.S. _prætig_.
Preuenting, 10/62, _pr. p._ anticipating. Lat. _prevenire_, to go
before.
Price, 114/16, _s._ renown, high estimation. Lat. _pretium_.
Pricketh, 77/22, _v. pr. t._ makes proud or puffs up.
Pricking, 67/16, _v._ embroidering, doing fancy work.
Pride, 19/12, _s._ excessive richness. "The ground having his _pride_
abated in the first crop"--G. Markham.
Prie, 35/15, _s._ privet.
Prim, 15/42, _s._ another name for the "privet;" called also "primwort."
Prime, 14/3, _s._ the time of the new moon, as change is the time of
the full moon.
Prime grass, 35/18, _s._ earliest grass. See footnote 10, p. 84.
Priuie, 10/12, _adj._ aware, acquainted.
Priuie, 15/42, _s._ privet. _Ligustrum vulgare_.
Procureth, 64/3, _v. pr. t._ contrives, brings about.
Promooters, 64/11, _s. pl._ informers.
Prooue, 46/1, _v. imp._ try, have some experience of.
*Prouision, 4, foresight. Lat. _providere_.
*Pullein, 37, Pullen, 87/5, _s. pl._ poultry, fowls. "Pullayne,
poullane, _poullaille_."--Palsgrave. See also Pulter.
Pullet, 63/16, _s._ chicken.
Pulter, 21/9, _s._ fowl keeper or breeder. "_Poullailler, m._ a poulter
or keeper of pullaine."--Cotgrave.
Pultrie, 21/9, _s._ poultry.
Purkey Wheat, 19/17, maize.
Purloiners, 10/54, _s. pl._ thieves, pilferers. Spelt "_pro_loiners" in
edit. of 1577.
Purse penniles, 10/28, _adj._ a purse without a penny, empty pursed.
Purslane, 40/10, _s._ water purslane. _Portulaca domestica_.--Gerard's
Herball, ed. 1633. From _porcellus_, a little pig; the plant being a
favourite food of swine.
Put to, 10/30, _v._ place.
Puttocks, 38/33, _s. pl._ kites, hawks. "Puttok, bryd,
_milvus_."--Prompt. Parv. In 99/3 the meaning is, voracious fellows.
Quaile, 15/34, _v._ fail.
Quaile, 91/6, _s._ be shaken.
Quamier, 33/56, _s._ quagmire, bog. O. Eng. quavemire.
Queenes gilleflowers, 43/27, _s._ the Dame's Violet, also called
Rogue's or Winter gilliflower. _Hesperis matronalis_, L.
Queere, 114/6, _s._ choir. "Queere, _chorus_."--Cath. Anglicum.
Quickset, 18/33, _s._ quickset hedge.
Quick setted, 35/45, _pp._ enclosed with a quickset hedge.
Quieter, 63/22, _adv._ more easily, quietly.
Quight, 115/2, _adv._ completely, entirely.
Quite, 15/7, _v. pr. t._ requite, repay.
Rabetstock, 17/20, _s._ a rabbet-plane, a joiner's tool for cutting
rabbets.
Rable, 22/17, _s._ crowd, number.
Rage, 114/35, _adj._ wild, dissipated.
Raise, 9/16, _v._ stir up.
Rampions, 40/12, _s._ rampion, _rapuntium_.--Gerard's Herball.
Ranke, 53/17, _adj._ strong, rank.
Ranker, 10/6, _s._ ill-feeling, quarrelling.
Raskabilia, 10/54, _s._ packs of rascals. Cf. Mid. Eng. _rascaille_.
"Rascalye, or symple puple, _plebs_."--Prompt. Parv.
Ratling, 19/34, _s._ the rattle.
Rawing, 16/25, _s._ the aftermath of a Meadow Water.--T.R. "Raweyne,
hey, _fenum serotinum_."--Prompt. Parv. See also Rowen.
Reame, 3/3, _s._ kingdom, country. O. Fr. _realme, reaume_.
Reasnable, 10/14, _adj._ fair, equitable, reasonable.
Reastie, 20/2, _adj._ rusty, rancid. "Reest as flesche,
_rancidus_."--Prompt. Parv. "I _reast_, I waxe ill of taste, as
bacon."--Palsgrave. See Wedgwood, s.v. Reasty.
Recken, 10/43, _v._ to compute, count.
Redele, page 3, _s._ riddle. "Rydel or probleme, _enigma_."--Prompt.
Parv. A.S. _rǽdelse_.
Reeded, 51/5, _pp._ thatched with reeds.
Reeding, 2/10, _s._ reading, study. A.S. _rédan_.
Reeke, 10/24, _v._ smoke. A.S. _rêcan_.
Refraine, 48/1, _v._ stop, prevent.
Rehersed, 45/1, _pp._ mentioned, named. Fr. _rehercer_, properly to go
over again like a harrow (Fr. _herce_) over a ploughed field.
Reisons, 34/21, _s. pl._ currants. "Raysouns of Corante."--Pegge's
Forme of Cury, ed. 1780, p. 16.
Relent, 23/11, _v._ become soft.
Rendrit, 24, _v._ = render it, _i.e._ return, requite it.
Rent, 55/7, _pp._ torn, plucked.
Rept, 18/43, _pp._ reaped, gained.
Resdue, 48/19, _s._ residue, remainder. Fr. _résidu_. Lat. _residuum_.
Respe, 15/27, Respies, 44/12, _s._ Raspberries.
Respit, 70/4, _s._ rest, respite.
Restfull, 106/2, _adj._ full of rest, resting.
Retcheles, 10/23, _adj._ reckless, careless. A.S. _recceleas_.
Reuengement, 9/18, _s._ revenge.
Rew, 45/18, _s._ rue.
Rife, 98/1, _adj._ abundant, common.
Rifle, 17/14, _s._ "a rifle or ruffle is no more than a bent stick
standing on the butt of a sithe-handle."--T.R. Now called a _bale_.
Rigging, 16/37, _pr. p._ making free with, knocking about.
Rigs, 15/37, _v. pr. t._ make free with.
Ringle, 33/54, _v. imp._ ring, put rings through the snouts.
Ringling, 16/32, _v._ ringing of swine to prevent their tearing up the
ground.
Riping, 37/7, ripening.
Rikes, 53/10, _s. pl._ ricks. A.S. _hreac_, a heap.
Rise, 40/5_a_, _s._ rice.
Rishes, 75/6, _s. pl._ rushes. A.S. _risce_. Lat. _ruscum_.
Riuet, 19/16, _s._ bearded wheat. "Dog-wheat, a bearded species, called
in Mark-lane, _rivets_."--Forby.
Rode, 57/36, _s._ harbour.
Roinish, 102/1, _adj._ mean, rough, coarse. Fr. _rogneux_. "The roynish
clown."--Shakspere, As You Like It, ii. 2.
Roister like, 98/3, blustering. "They ruffle and _roist_ it out."
Harrison's Eng. ed. F. J. Furnivall, New Shakspere Soc. Pt. I, p.
77. "This is the very _royster_ that gagg'd and bound me, Sir."--The
Reformation, 1673.
Rokat, 40/13, _s._ garden rocket. Fr. _roquette. Eruca
sativa_.--Gerard's Herball, ed. 1633.
Roong, 15/29, _pp._ have rings put through their noses to prevent them
from tearing up the ground.
Roperipe, 92/3, _s._ one old enough to be flogged. "Deserving of
hanging."--Howell, 1660.
Roste, 63/19, _s._ rule the roste = domineer, have the sway. According
to Richardson equivalent to "_rule the roost_," an expression of which
every farm yard would supply an explanation.
Rottenly, 18/11, _adj._ rich, crumbly.
Roule, 17/8, _s._ a rule, measure.
Roules, 10/54, _v._ roll in, bring in.
Rowe, 36/12, _s._ row, a rowe = in a row.
Rowen, 57/25, aftermath of mown meadows. "_Rowen_ is a field kept up
till after Michaelmas, that the corn left on the ground may sprout into
green."--Bailey's Dict. See Rawing above, and Rawings in Ray's Gloss.
Rowleth, 46/15, _v. pr. t._ roll. O. Fr. _roler_, Ger. _rollen_, from
Lat. _rotulare_.
Rubstone, 17/14, _s._ a sandstone for a scythe. "The rub or buckle
stone which husbandmen doo occupie in the whetting of their
sithes."--Harrison, Description of England, Pt. 2, p. 64.
Rudenes, 2/9, _s._ want of refinement, plainness, homeliness.
Ruffen, 98/3, _s._ ruffian, scoundrel.
Runciuall peas, 41/9, _s. pl._ marrow-fat peas. Supposed to be derived
from Span. _Roncesvalles_, a town at the foot of the Pyrenees, where
gigantic bones of old heroes were pretended to be shown; hence the name
was applied to anything of a size larger than usual.
Runnagate, 77/17, runaway. "White-livered _runagate_."--Shakspere,
Richard III. iv. 4.
Runt-wood, page 84, footnote 8, _s._ stumps of underwood. "Neither
young poles nor old runts are suitable for building."--Holland.
Rydgis, 16/9, _s. pl._ ridges.
Sad, 17/12, _adj._ disappointed, vexed.
Saddle, 35/37, _s._ the saddle, riding. We still say "a saddle horse,"
"a cart horse," meaning a horse for riding or carting.
Saile, 114/23, _s._ sail, beare low saile = to live humbly
or economically. "Than bear so _low a sail_, to strike to
thee."--Shakspere, 3 Hen. VI. v. 1. Cf. also 3 Henry VI. iii. 3.
Sallets, 40/1, _s. pl._ salads.
Sallow, 22/26, _s._ a species of willow. A.S. _salig_.
Salue, 4/2, _s._ ointment, salve.
Sampire, 40/6, _s._ samphire. _Crithmum marinum_.--Gerard's Herball,
1633.
"Half way down,
Hangs one that gathers _samphire_, dreadful trade."
--Shakspere, Lear, iv. 6.
Sauer, 10/10, _s._ scent, inkling.
Sauer, 77/3, a person to look after and see that things are not wasted.
Sauerie, 39/35, _s._ savoury. Fr. _savorée_. Lat. _satureja_.
Sauerlie, 9/3, _adj._ frugal, gained by saving.
Sauin, 45/22, _s._ savin. _Juniperus sabina_, Linn.
Sawsie, 114/35, _adj._ saucy, impudent.
Saxefrage, 44/13, _s._ saxifrage. Lat. _saxifraga_, from _saxum_, a
rock, and _frango_, to break, being supposed to disintegrate the rocks,
in the crevices of which it grows, and thence to dissolve stone in the
bladder. Called in Scotland _Thirlstane_, which has the same meaning.
Scaberd, 102/2, _s._ scabbard.
Scamble, 51/7, _v._ scramble for.
Scant, 56/52, _adj._ scarce, wanting.
Scant, 114/24, _adv._ scarcely. So in Bacon's "Table of Coulers," I.
"The Epicure that will _scant_ indure the Stoic to be in sight of him."
Cf. also Romeo and Juliet, i. 2.
Scanted, 2/14, _adj._ limited, stinted, grudged. Cf. also note E317.
Scape, 97/1, _v._ escape, get off.
Scare, 56/13, _v. imp._ drive away.
Scotch, 33/17, _v. pr. t._ cut, hew.
Scoutwatch, 10/19, _s._ watch, guard.
Scowles, 10/23, _v. pr. t._ scowls, frowns, is ill-tempered.
Scrall, 49/_c, v. pr. t._ crawl. "To scrall, stir, _motito_"--Coles'
Lat. Dict. "And the river shall _scral_ with frogs."--Wiclif, Exodus
viii. 3.
Scrauling, 49/9, _pr. p._ crawling.
Scruplenes, page 4, _s._ scruples, scrupulousness. Lat. _scrupulus_, a
little stone such as may get into a traveller's shoe and distress him;
hence, a source of doubt or distress.
Sea holie, 40/17, _s._ sea-hulfer, sea-holm; a plant of the genus
_Eryngium_ (_E. maritimum_). A.S. _hulfer_, holly.
Sealed, 17/18, _adj._ certified, stamped.
Seame, 21/2, _s._ a quarter of corn. A.S. _seam_.
Secresie, 9/20, _s._ secrets, private concerns.
Sedge collars, 17/12, _s. pl._ collars made of sedge or reeds.
Seede, 51/12, _v._ obtain seed from.
Seede cake, 90/7, "a festival so called at the end of wheat-sowing in
Essex and Suffolk, when the village is to be treated with seed cakes,
pasties, etc."--Warton.
Seeith, 19/41, _v. imp._ boil.
Seeke, 10/24, _v._ seek, "their dinners to seeke" = their dinners have
to be sought, i.e. are lacking.
Seelie, 48/21, _adj._ silly, simple. A.S. _sælig_. O. L. Ger. _salig_.
Seene, 95/1, _adj._ practised, experienced.
"Its a schoolmaster
Well _seen_ in music."
--Shakspere, Taming of Shrew, i. 2.
Seene, 106/16, _v. pt. t._ appeared. Lat. _visus est_.
Seeth, 78/5, _v. imp._ boil.
Seeue, 17/3, _s._ sieve, sifter.
Seggons, 85/6, _s. pl._ poor labourers. "_Seg-head_, a
blockhead."--Craven Cf. _Segger_, Chester Plays, ii. 51.
Sell, 114/21, _s._ cell, abbey.
Semsters, 86/7, _s. pl_ needlewomen, seamstresses. A.S. _seamestre_.
Seruice-trees, 34/24, _s. pl._ more correctly spelt _Servise-tree_,
from Lat. _cervisia_, its fruit having from ancient times been used for
making a fermented liquor, a kind of beer.
Seruiture, 99/1, _s._ servant, attendant.
Set, 36/25, _v. imp._ plant round, set.
Set, 35/45, _s._ the young shoots.
Setteth, 10/60, _v. pr. t._ risks. "Setteth his soule upon sixe or on
seauen" = "risks his soul on the cast of a die."
Seuer, 15/40, _v. imp._ separate, sort.
Seuerall, title, _adj._ inclosed land, divided into fields by fences.
L. Lat. _separalis_.
Sewe, 15/17, _v. imp._ drain. Cf. sewer. Welsh, _sych_, dry. Cf. Lat.
_siccus_. See Pegge's Kenticisms.
Shackles, 17/21, _s. pl._ shackles. A.S. _scacul_. Dutch, _schakel_, a
link of a chain.
Shack time, 16/30, _s._ the time during which the shaken-out grain
remains on the ground after harvest. "_Shack_, Norfolk, a general
common for hogs, from the end of harvest till seed time. To go at
_shack_, to go at large."--Coles' Dict. 1676. Brockett's Glossary
gives: "_Shack, shak,_ to shed, or shake, as corn in harvest. Then
_shack-fork_, a shake-fork." "_Shacking-time_, the season when malt is
ripe."--Kersey's Eng. Dict. 1715. Wedgwood (Eng. Etym.) says: "Shack
is the shaken grain remaining on the ground when the gleaning is over,
the fallen mast (Forby). Hence to _shack_, to turn pigs or poultry into
the stubble field to feed on the scattered grain. _Shack_, liberty of
winter pasturage, when the cattle are allowed to rove over the tillage
land." Forby gives "_Shack_, sb. the acorns or mast under the trees."
Compare the provincial "Shucks," the pods or shells from which peas
have been _shaken_, or, as it is frequently called, "_shook_."
Share, 52/1, _v._ shear.
Shares, 17/10, _s._ plough shares.
Sharing, 17/16, _adj._ shearing.
Shaue, 17/6, _s._ spokeshave.
Sheawd, 102/7, _pp._ shown, displayed.
Shed, 57/7, _v._ lose the grains of corn.
Sheepebiter, 64/17, _s._ a thief, lit. a wolf, a cant phrase. See
Halliwell, s.v.
Shent, 57/45, _pp._ ruined, disgraced. A.S. _scendan_.
Shere, 3/7, _s._ shire, county. A.S. _scire_.
Shift, 9/39, _v._ manage, fare.
Shift, 104/1, _s._ excuse, makeshift.
Shifting, 95/5, _adj._ changing, often removing.
Shifting, 10/27, 10/34, _v._ trickery, cheating, acting shiftingly.
Shiftingly, 9/26, _adv._ by tricks or mean shifts.
Shock, 56/20, _s._ a certain number of bundles or sheaves of corn (in
some parts twelve). "A _shocke_ of wheate, _meta tritici_."--Withal's
Dict. 1608.
Shock, 57/10, _v. imp._ collect into _shocks_ or heaps of twelve
sheaves.
Shod, 17/6, _pp._ tired.
Sholue, 17/1, _s._ shovel.
Shoo, 102/2, _s._ pl. shoes. A.S. _sceo_, a shoe, pl. _sceon_.
Shot, 114/40, _s._ expense, reckoning.
Showreth out, 14/3, _v. pr. t._ is showery, rainy weather.
Shreaw, 16/17, _s._ thief, rascal, 67/24, _s._ shrew, scold. See Shrew.
Shred pies, 31/3, _s. pl._ mince pies, the meat being cut up into
_shreds_. A.S. _screâdan_, small pieces. "No matter for plomb-porridge
or _shrid pies_."--Sheppard's Epigrams, 1651.
Shrew, 64*/6, _s._ scold. "Shrewe, _pravus_. Schrewyd, _pravatus,
depravatus_."--Prompt. Parv.
Shroftide, 90/3, _s._ Shrove Tuesday, the day before the first day of
Lent.
Shrouing, 90/3, _s._ to be merry, probably derived from the sports and
merriment of Shrovetide. See Halliwell, s.v. Shrove.
Shut, _v._ 51/5, shoot, throw; 37/13, shoot out, spring up.
Sieth, 35/25, _s._ scythe. A.S. siðe.
Siethes, 39/39, _s. pl._ chives, spelt in Hollyband's Dict. 1593,
_sieves_, from Fr. _cive, Allium fissile_, L.
Sirops, 91/3, _s. pl._ sirups.
Siszers, 17/4, _s._ scissors.
Sithe, 17/14, _s._ scythe.
Skare, 2/7, _v._ frighten. Icel. _skirra_ = to drive away.
Skared, 69/4, _pp._ frightened, cheated of.
Skavel, 17/19, _s._ a kind of spade, having its sides slightly turned
up, used in draining, and cleaning narrow ditches. Compare _scuffle_, a
garden hoe, and _shovel_.
Skep, 17/3, _s._ a basket made of rushes or straw.
Skill, 114/38, _s._ plan, design.
Skillesse, 113/4, _adj._ simple, homely.
Skirrets, 40/19, _s. pl._ the water-parsnip. _Sium latifolium_,
contracted from _skirwort_, its older name, a corruption of
_sugar-wort_. Ger. _zucker-wurzel_.
Skreene, 90/2, _s._ fire-screen. See note E453.
Skreine, 17/16, _s._ sieve, screen. O. Fr. _escrein_.
Skuppat, 17/19, _s._ a spade used in draining and making narrow
ditches. Belgian _schup_, a spade.
Skuttle, 17/16, _s._ a screen for cleaning corn, i.e. a large broad and
shallow shovel for casting threshed corn from one side of the barn to
the other that light grains and dust may fall short.
Slab, 15/35, _s._ the outside cut of sawn timber.
Slabbered, 48/20, _pp._ dirtied, beslobbered. L. Ger. and Dut.
_slabbern_.
Slained, 106/15, _pp._ slain, murdered, but perhaps we should read
_stained_.
Slake, 1/4, _v._ to slacken.
Slapsauce, 98/2, _s._ "a parasite."--Minsheu. "A lickedish, a lickerish
fellow, a _slapsawce_."--Nomenclator, 1585.
*Slapt, 72_e_, _pp._
Slea, 107/3, _v._ slay, kill. A.S. _slean_.
Sled, 17/11, _s._ sledge, truck. Ger. and Dutch _slede_. Icel. _sledi_.
A.S. _slidan_, to slide.
Slept, 90/1, _pp._ slipt, forgotten, omitted.
Slise, 35/20, _v. imp._ slice, cut.
Sliuers, 23/1, _s. pl._ pieces of split wood, chips. A.S. _slifan_.
Slugging, 75/1, _s._ lying late in bed.
Sluts, 75/5, _s. pl._ slovens, slatterns. Ger. _schlutte_. Dutch _slet_.
Smack, 57/24, a pleasant repast.
Smalach, 45/20, _s._ celery, or water parsley. The _small ache_ or
parsley as compared with the _hipposelinum_ or great parsley.
Small nuts, 34/22, Smalnut, 33/57, _s._ hazel nuts.
Snag dragons, 43/30, _s. pl._ snapdragons, so called from its corolla
resembling the _snap_ or snout. Dut. _sneb_ of some animal. Called by
Lyte "Calf's snowte."
Snorting, 9/16, _adj._ snoring, sleepy. A.S. _snora_, a snoring.
Snudgeth, 62/2, _v. pr. t._ is economical or saving, or, works quietly
or snugly. In Lanc. _snidge_. A.S. _snid_. Danish _snedig_, cunning.
'Thus your husbandrye, methincke, is much more like the life of a
covetous _snudge_, that ofte very evill proves, then the labour of a
goode husbande, that knoweth well what he doth."--Ascham, Toxophilus,
p. 6.
Sockle, 35/30, _v. imp._ suckle, provide with milk.
Sod, 22/27, _pp._ boiled.
Soketh, 19/2, _v. pr. t._ wets, soaks.
Soles, 17/21, _s. pl._ a collar of wood, put round the neck of cattle
to confine them to the post.
Sollen, 89/13, _adj._ sullen, sulky.
Soller, 57/5, _s._ garret, loft, or upper room. "_Solarium_, an upper
room, chamber, or garret which in some parts of England is still called
a _sollar_."--Kennett, Gloss. p. 134.
Sooth, 10/61, _v._ to flatter.
Sops in wine, 43/31, _s._ a kind of pink resembling a carnation; the
clove pink. "The rose and speckled flowre cald sops-in-wine."--The
Affectionate Shepheard, 1594.
Sorell, 39/36, _s._ sorrell. Fr. _surelle_, a dimin. from L. Ger.
_suur_ = sour, from the acidity of the leaves. _Rumex acetosa_, L.
Sost, 48/20, _pp._ dirty, foul. "Of any one that mixes several
slops, or makes any place wet or dirty, we say in Kent, he makes a
_soss_."--Kennett MS.
Souse, 12/5, _s._ pig's feet and ears pickled.
Soutage, 57/51, _s._ bagging for hops, or coarse cloth. See More's MS.
Additions to Ray's North Country Gloss.
Southly, 16/20, _adv._ facing the south.
Sowce, 19/37, _v. imp._ steep in brine, pickle.
Sower, 35/51, _adj._ sour.
Spare, 113/3, _v._ economize, be sparing.
Spareth, 10/35, _v. pr. t._ are economical, save.
Spars, 33/16, _s. pl._ rafters.
Speedfull, 52/13, _adj._ useful, profitable.
Speeding, 2/10, _s._ progress, success.
Speered, 84/5, _pp._ sprouted, a term in malting. "I _spyer_ as corne
dothe whan it begynneth to waxe rype, _je espie_."--Palsgrave.
Spent, 15/41, _pp._ used, consumed.
Sperage, 40/18, _s._ asparagus. Lemery in his Treatise on Foods, 1704,
gives as the etymology: _ab aspergendo_, sprinkling, because 'tis
convenient to water them!
Spials, 64/12, _s. pl._ spies. Fr. _épier_. O. Fr. _espier_, whence our
_espy, spy_. Low Lat. _espia_.
Spide, 2/9, _v. pr. t._ beheld, saw.
Spight, 57/13, _s._ as a spite or grief to.
Spight, 97/6, _v._ spite, be unpropitious.
Spil, 102/6, _v. pr. t._ spoil, ruin.
Spilled, 50/6, Spilt, 56/54, _pp._ ruined, spoilt. A.S. _spillan_.
Spring, 48/11, _s._ young buds of felled underwood.
Spurlings, 12/5, _s. pl._ smelts. "Spurlin, a smelt, Fr.
_esperlan_."--Skinner. Sparling, smelts of the Thames.--Brockett's
N. C. Glossary. "First a sprat, then a small sparling, then a
sparling."--R. Holme, p. 325.
Squatteth, 16/38, _v. pr. t._ sit or crouch down. Welsh _yswatian_, to
squat, lie flat.
Squier, 10/57, _s._ squire, gentleman.
Stadled, 48/8, _pp._ "to stadle a Wood is to leave at certain distances
a sufficient number of young trees to replenish it."--T.R.
Staddles, 47/9, Stadles, 48/9, _s. pl._ young growing trees left after
cutting underwood.
Staid, 2/8, _v. pt. t._ kept, detained.
Staie, 10/7, _s._ means of support.
Staie, 19/40, _v._ prevent, stop.
Staied, 60/9, _adj._ steady, staid.
Stalfed, 21/11, _adj._ stall-fattened.
Stamp, 18/48, _v. imp._ bruise, pound.
Stands thee upon, 10/39, are suitable, proper for. To _stand_ a person
_on_ is _to be incumbent_ upon him, _it is his duty_.--Wilbraham,
Gloss. of Cheshire Words, 1818.
Star of Bethlehem, 43/34, _s._ Star of Bethlehem. _Ornithogalum
umbellatum_, a bulbous plant having a white star-like flower, like
pictures of the stars that indicated Our Lord's birth.
Star of Jerusalem, 43/35, _s._ perhaps sunflower or turn-sole. Ital.
_girasole_, familiarized into _Jerusalem_.
Stay, 114/31, _s._ rest, quiet.
Steade, 63/3, _s._ in steade = to advantage.
*Stede, 19, _v._ suffice, profit.
Steelie, 19/12, _adj._ hard, firm.
Steepe, 46/6, _adj._ a steepe = steeply.
Steeres, 36/8, _s. pl._ oxen in their third year. A.S. _steor_.
Sterue, 103/4, _v._ starve, perish. A.S. _steorfan_.
*Steruelings, 50, _s. pl._ half-starved animals.
Stick, 16/34, _v. imp._ to stick boards = to arrange them neatly one
upon another with sticks between.--T.R.
Still, 33/53, _v. imp._ quiet, stop from growing.
Still, 44/1, _v._ distill.
Still, 50/33, _s._ a still. Lat. _stilla_, a drop.
Stinted, 95/4, _pp._ appointed, settled.
Stirre, 77/6, _v._ move quickly, bestir herself.
Stitchwort, 45/23, _s._ stitchwort, chickweed, _Stellaria media_, Linn.
Stocke gilleflowers, 43/36, _s._ now shortened to stock, from stock,
the trunk or woody stem of a tree or shrub, added to _gilliflower_ to
distinguish it from plants of the pink tribe, called, from their scent,
_Clove-gilleflowers_.
Stocks, 22/13, _s. pl._ young trees.
Stoutnes, 9/9, _s._ force.
Stouer, 20/16, _s._ winter food for cattle, fodder from thrashed
corn, whether straw, chaff, or colder (broken ears of corn), from
the Old French _estavoir, estovoir, estouvier_, A.N. _estovers_, or
_estouvoir_, which denotes, according to Roquefort (Glossaire de la
langue Romane), 'provision de tout ce qui est nécessaire.'
Strangenes, 3/1, _s._ strangeness.
Strawforke, 17/1, _s._ a pitchfork.
Strawisp, 19/38, _s._ wisps of straw.
Streight waies, 114/8, _adv._ at once.
Strike, 16/9, _v. pr. t._ striking is the last ploughing before the
seed is committed to the earth.--M.
Strike, 17/1, _s._ a bushel measure. "Robert Webb of Shottre oweth me
iiij_s._ iiij_d._ lent hym in money for making ix _strycke_ and a half
of malt."--Will of John Cocks of Stratford-on-Avon, dated May 27th,
1600.
Stripe, 57/5, _s._ "beating upon a Hurdle or some other rough
thing."--T.R.
Stroieng, 48/17, _s._ destruction, injury. O. Fr. (_de_)_struire_. Lat.
_struere_.
Stroken, 35/31, _pp._ stroked, kindly treated.
Strowing, 42/1, _adj._ for strewing.
Stroyal, 10/23, _s._ waste all, wasteful.
Stub, 35/9, _s._ stump, buie at the stub = buy on the ground. A.S.
_stybb_, allied to Lat. _stipes_.
Stub, 33/47, _v. imp._ grub up.
"And badd hym take a mattock anon,
And _stubbe_ the olde rote away,
That had stonde there many a day."
--MS. Cantab. Ff. ii. 38, f. 129.
Stud, 33/16, _s._ the uprights in a lath and plaster wall. "In manie
places there are not above foure, six, or nine inches between _stud_
and _stud_."--Harrison, Pt. I, p. 233.
Stur, 62/6, _v._ move about, exert.
Sturs, 63/16, _s. pl._ disturbances, commotions.
Substanciallie, 9/23, _adv._ in reality, truly.
Subtiltie, 9/17, _s._ cunning, artfulness, deceit.
Sucker, 23/4, _s._ assistance, help, succour.
Suckerie, 91/2, Suckery, 39/38, _s._ succory, the wild endive, chicory.
Fr. _chicorée_, often replaced by fraudulent dealers with dandelion
roots, _Cichorium Intybus_, L.
Sudgerne, 10/8, _v._ settle down. Fr. _sojourner_. Cf. Barbour's Bruce,
E. E. Text Soc. ed. Skeat, 6/26, 16/47, and 20/356.
Suer, 84/3, _adj._ sure, careful. O. Fr. _seur, segur_. Lat. _securus_.
Suerty, 9/24, _s._ being security or surety.
Suite, 18/49, _s._ description, kind.
Suretie, 10/28, _s._ security, bail.
Swage, 114/26, _v._ assuage.
Swatches, 57/18, _s. pl._ rows or ranks of barley, etc.
Swathes, 55/2, _s. pl._ the line of grass or corn cut and thrown
together by the scythe in mowing. Cotgrave gives: "_Gerber des
javelles_ to bind corne of _swath_ into sheaues, to sheaue vp corne."
"Fœni striga. Monceaux de foin par ordre. The _swathe_ or strake of
grasse, as it lyeth mowne downe with the sithe."--Nomenclator.
Sweate, 56/20, _s._ a sweating, _i.e._ feel the effects of the heat.
Sweete Johns, 43/33, _s._ a species of _Dianthus_ or pink, called also
_Sweet John's-wort_.
Swerue, 96/42, _s._ fail, depart.
Swill, 78/5, _s._ hog's-wash.
Swim, 10/59, _v._ to abound, to overflow.
Swinge, 52/16, _v. imp._ cut down with the long swinging scythe used
for that purpose.
Tack, 12/3, Tacke, 76/3, _s._ substance. A tough piece of meat is said
to have plenty of _tack_ in it.
Taile, 77/8, _s._ back.
Taint wormes, 65/3, _s. pl._ "A small red spider called _taint_ is by
the country people accounted a deadly poison to cows and horses."--Sir
T. Browne.
Tale, 83/4, _s._ tally, reckoning.
Talent, 59/9, _s._ the gifts and powers entrusted by God. Of course the
reference is to the Parable.
Tallie, 78/2, _s._ score, bill, charge.
Tallwood, 53/12, _s._ wood cut for billets. "Tall woode, pacte wodde to
make byllettes of, _taillee_."--Palsgrave.
Tampring, 17/16, _v._ tempering, mixing, thus the Bible speaks of
"_untempered_ mortar."
Tane, 66/1, _pp._ taken.
Tanzie, 39/40, _s._ tansy, _Tanacetum vulgare_, Linn.
Tapple up taile, 21/14. See note E125.
Tarie, 16/11, _v._ delay, keep back.
Tarragon, 40/21, _s._ tarragon. _Tragum vulgare_.--Gerard's Herball.
Used for perfuming vinegar in France. O. Fr. _targon_.
Tarrie, 85/1, _v._ wait for, await.
Tawnie, 43/3, _adj._ yellowish.
Ted, 54/1, _v._ to spread abroad new-cut grass. "I teede hay, I tourne
it afore it is made in cockes, _je fene_."--Palsgrave.
Tedder, 10/9, _s._ tether, "live within one's tether" = "within the
limits of one's income."
Teddered, 16/33, _pp._ tethered, tied up.
Teemes, 58/6, _s. pl._ teams.
Tell, 50/30, _v. imp._ count.
Temmes lofe, 16/11, _s._ "that made of a mixture of wheat and rye out
of which the coarser bran is taken."--T.R. "_Miche_, a fine manchet;
the country people of France call so also a loafe of boulted bread or
_tems_ bread."--Cotgrave.
Temper, 91/2, _s._ condition.
Tend, 10/39, _v. imp._ attend.
Tendance, 56/53, _s._ attention, care.
Tendeth, 62/3, _v. pr. t._ attends to, looks after.
Tere, 19/30, _s._ tares.
Thacke, 53/12, _s._ thatch, roof covering. "Erige, holme or
_thacke_."--Huloet, 1552. "Thakke, _tegmen, tectura_."--Vocab. MS.
Thacker, 36/24, _s._ thatcher. "A proud _thacker_ of Theeva would laugh
them to scorn."--Pilkington's Works, 381.
Thee, 10/8, _v._ thrive, prosper. "A very late example of this word; at
this time it was nearly obsolete. A.S. _théon_, to thrive, flourish.
"God that sittis in trinite,
Gyffe thaym grace wel to _the_
That lystyns me a whyle."
--MS. Cantab., Ff. v. 48, f. 47.
Theeuerie, 86/12, _s._ dishonesty.
Thencrease, 21/2, for the encrease = the increase, gain.
Thend, 19/40, for "the end."
Thetch, 57/32, _s._ thatch.
Thicker, 74/2, _adv._ more frequently.
Thies, 49/_c, s. pl._ thighs, limbs. A.S. _theoh_. Icel. _thio_.
Thiller, 17/4, the shaft-horse, also the last horse in a team. A.S.
_thil_, a pole or shaft. "Thylle horse, _veredus_."--Prompt. Parv.
Thoes, 19/40, pr. those.
Thon, 110, the one.
Thorow, 15/15, _v._ pass through.
Thother, 110, the other.
Thresh, 90/3, _v. imp._ whip, thrash.
Thresher, 86/13, _s._ a duster of furniture.
Thrift, page 3, _s._ fortune, success, prosperity. Icel. _thrif_.
Thriftie, 59/1, _adj._ thrifty, economical.
Thrift's ladder, 57/30, _s._ the ladder or road to fortune.
Thry-fallowing, 56/1, _s._ "the third fallow; perhaps also
cross-fallowing."--Mavor. "The third plowing of a summer fallow."--T.R.
Thwack, 18/3, _v. imp._ thump, beat together.
Tiburne stretch, 114/35, an execution. See note E498.
Tide, 63/2, _pp._ tied, fastened.
Tidie, 57/22, _adj._ "An old word signifying neat, proper, or in
season, from the word Tide."--T.R.
Tieth, 56/19, _s._ tithe.
Tilman, 16/4, _s._ farm labourers, ploughmen, etc.
Tilth, 4/2, _s._ tillage, cultivation. A.S. _tilð_, from _tilian_, to
till.
Tilth, 47/2, the ground tilled.
Tilture, 38/21, _s._ tillage, cultivation.
Time, 39/41, _s._ thyme. θυμος [Greek: thymos], from θυω [Greek: thuo],
fumigate, and identical with Lat. _fumus_, from its being used in
sacrifices.
Timelie, 55/9, _adv._ in time.
Timely, 16/19, _adv._ early, soon.
Tine, 50/18, _s._ wild vetch or tare, a plant that _tines_ or encloses
and imprisons other plants. _Vicia hirsuta_.
Tith, 56/12, _s._ tithe.
Tithers, 10/52, _s. pl._ payers of tithes.
Tithing, 10/52, _s._ paying tithes or dues.
Tits, 15/6, _s. pl._ horses. The phrase "a nice _tit_" is still in use.
Titters, 50/18, _s. pl._ a noxious weed amongst corn.
Tittle tattle, 22/3, chattering, gossipping.
To, 18/6, _prep._ for, as.
Tode, with an R, 62/17, _s._ See note E384.
Toesed, 114/5, _pp._ pulled, pinched. Cf. "to _tease_, or card wool."
A.S. _tæsan_, to pull, pluck.
Toieng, 61/1, _pr. p._ playing, amusing ourselves.
Toies, 57/34, _s. pl._ amusements, occupations.
Toile, 2/11, _s._ labour, work.
Tolleth, 55/12, _v. pr. t._ takes toll.
Ton, ... tother, 55/8, the one ... the other.
Tone, 10/10, the one.
Tooteth, 94/2, _v. pr. t._ looks or strives anxiously. "_Tooting_ and
prying."--Taylor's Workes, 1630, i. 119.
Toppingly, 49/1, _adj._ ?
Tost, 2/11, _v. pt. t._ agitated, harassed. Cf. _tease_.
Touch, 57/43, _s._ faith, honour, to keep touch, to keep faith,
perform a promise. The phrase occurs in the Ballad of "George
Barnwell," line 42.
Traie, 17/16, _s._ a mason's hod.
Traine, 32/2, _s._ draw. Fr. _trainer_, from L. Lat. _trahinare_, from
Lat. _trahere_.
Transpose, 59/10, _v._ arrange, dispose of.
Trauell, page 2, _s._ labour, work. Fr. _travail_.
Trauerse, 59/2, _v._ start upon, proceed upon.
Treachery, 9/27, _s._ breach of faith, perfidy.
Treene, 85/10, _adj._ wooden.
Trew, 113/2, _adj._ true.
Trick, 15/35,_ adj._ neat, clean, tidy.
Tricketh, 94/5, _v. pr. t._ dresses up, furnishes.
Trickly, 73/3, _adj._ neat, tidy.
Trim, 23/9, _v._ repair.
Trim, 3/2, _adv._ quickly, at once, easily. A.S. _trum_.
Trimlie, 57/34, _adv._ neatly, cleanly.
Trinkets, 17/5, _s. pl._ porringers (Halliwell), Ray gives:
counterfeits and trinkets, _s. pl._ porringers and saucers. Cheshire.
See note in Prompt. Parv.
Triue, 59/2, _v. pr. t._ (for contrive), attempt, try.
Troffe, 17/9, _s._ a trough.
Trope, 28/2, _s._ a phrase. From Greek τροπὸς [Greek: tropos], a
turning, lit., the use of a word or expression in a different sense
from that which properly belongs to it.
Troth, 1/1, _s._ truth. See an article on the derivation of this word
in "Leaves from a Word Hunter's Note Book," by Rev. A. S. Palmer, 1876,
p. 73.
Trowleth, 59/6, _v. pr. t._ helps on, moves towards. Welsh _troliaw_,
to _troll_ or trundle.
Trudge, 73/20, _v._ go, be spent.
Trudgeth, 10/21, _v. pr. t._ labours, journey's far.
Trull, 36/4, _s._ girl, lass.
Trustilie, 9/22. _adv._ confidingly.
Tullie, 112/5, Cicero.
Tumb, 106/15, _s._ the tomb, grave.
Tumbrel, 16/7, _s._ a tumbril, a dung-cart.
Turfe, 52/12, _s._ turf, peat. "Turfe of flagge, swarde of the erthe,
_cespes_."--Prompt. Parv. "A Turfe, _cespes_."--Cathol. Angl.
Turnebroch, 80/2, _s._ Before the introduction of _jacks_, spits were
turned either by dogs trained for the purpose, or by lads kept in the
family, or hired, as occasion arose, to turn the spit, or _broach_.
These boys were the _Turn-broaches_. See Halliwell.
Turn up, 46/18, _v._ deck, ornament.
Twelftide, 90/2, _s._ Twelfth Day, i.e. January 6th, twelve days after
Christmas. "At the city of New Sarum is a very great faire for cloath
at _Twelftyde_ called Twelfe Market."--Aubrey's Wilts. MS. Roy. Soc. p.
333.
Twifallow, 50/23, _v. imp._ till twice, plough twice. See Thry-fallowing.
Twiggers, 35/28, _s. pl._ first-class breeders. See Halliwell, s.v.
Twigging, 35/28, _s._ fast breeding.
Twinlings, 35/28, _s. pl._ twins (according to Dr. Mavor, but see note
E177).
Twinning, 35/28, _s._ bearing twins.
Twise, 59/11, _adv._ twice.
Twitcher, 17/17, _s._ instruments used for clinching the
_hog-rings_.--Mavor.
Twitchis, 53/2, _s._ pl. wounds, cuts.
Undeskanted, 10/39, _pp._ untalked of.
Vndooeth, 10/46, _v._ ruins, destroys.
Vnfainedlie, 9/38, _adv._ unfeignedly, in truth.
Vnlustie, 19/24, _adj._ poor.
Vnmeete, 57/5, _adj._ unfit. A.S. _unmæte_.
Vnsauerie, 9/15, _adj._ wasteful, ruinous.
Vnshaken, 16/34, _adj._ perfect, in good order, free from _shakes_.
Vnspilt, 16/8, _pp._ not wasted.
Vntackle, 23/6, _v._ unyoke.
Vntangled, 57/50, _pp._ freed from the hop vines.
Vnthrift, 6/3, _s._ a prodigal, spendthrift.
Vnthriftely, 9/30*, _adv._ wastefully.
Vsher, 10/17, _s._ doorkeeper. O. Fr. _ussier, huissier_, from _uis,
huis_, a door.
Vaine, 18/8, _s._ liking, fancy.
Vainfull, 2/13, _adj._ vain, fickle.
Valerian, 45/24, _s._ Valerian. _Valeriana officinalis_, Linn.
Vance, 114/7, _v._ advance.
Vantage, 3/7, _s._ advantage, profit.
Vegetiue, 55/7, _adj._ belonging to the plant.
Vent, 19/27, _s._ sale, disposal. Fr. _vente_, from Lat. _vendere,
venditum_, to sell. "There is no _vent_ for any commoditie except
wool."--Sir W. Temple.
Venter, 83/4, _v._ venture, risk.
Ventrest, 19/35, _v. pr. t._ risk, venture.
Vergis, 18/42, _s._ verjuice, the juice of crab-apples, or other unripe
fruit. Fr. _verjus_, from _vert_, green and _jus_, juice.
Verie, 92/4, _adj._ true, real.
Verlets, 63/18, _s. pl._ rascals, scoundrels. O. Fr. _varlet, vaslet_,
now _valet_.
Vermin, 33/7, _v._ destroy the vermin.
Vew, 114/24, _s._ view, sight.
Vewe, 75/7, _v._ view, examine.
Vice, 64/19, _s._ buffoon. The fool or punchinello of old shows.
"Light and lascivious poems, uttered by these buffoons or _vices_ in
plays."--Puttenham, ii. 9, p. 69.
Villeny, 9/21, _s._ unfair or mean treatment.
Vitleth, 97/1, _v. pr. t._ eats, dines.
Vittels, 57/39, _s. pl._ provisions, food.
Voyd, 64*/4, _v._ avoid.
Wadling, 35/45, _s._ wattling, wattled fence. "Wattles are wood
slit."--T.R.
Wadmus (? Wadmul), page 37, note 1, a very thick, coarse kind of
woollen cloth, made originally of Iceland wool. Icel. _vadmâl_.
Halliwell, s.v. _Wadmal_.
Wag, 87/3, _s._ messenger.
Waid, 114/40, _pp._ considered, reflected on.
Waieth, 99/5, Waith, 101/5, _v. pr. t._ considers, reflects.
Waight, 56/24, _v. pr. t._ watch, wait about.
Waights, 10/44, _s._ weights, measures.
Waight, 99/1, _v._ attend or wait at table.
Waine, 48/22, _v. imp._ fetch, bring, lit. to convey in a _wain_ or
wagon.
Waine, 16/7, _s._ waggon. A.S. _wæn, wägen_.
Wake day, 90/5, _s._ a village festival, kept originally on the day of
the dedication of the parish church. See note E455.
Walke, 48/17, _s._ pasturing.
Wallow, 102/2, _v. pr. t._ make dirty, cover.
Wand, 33/45, _v. imp._ inclose with poles.
Wanteth, 94/8, _v. pr. t._ is in want.
Wantey, 17/5, _s._ a rope or leathern girdle, by which burdens are tied
to the back of a horse; _wamb-tie_, a belly-band.
Wanton, 90/5, _s._ merry girl. O. E. _wantowen_, from _wan-_, prefix
signifying lack or _want_, and _togen_, _pp._ of _teon_, to educate.
Wardens, 34/26, _s. pl._ a large baking pear. "I would have him roasted
like a _warden_."--Beau. and Flet.
Warely, 115/2, _adv._ carefully, warily.
Wares, 22/19, _s. pl._ productions.
Warily, 10/34, _adv._ discreetly, cautiously. A.S. _wær_.
Warrener, 33/7, _s._ the keeper of a warren.
Wart, 114/5, _v. pr. t._ wert, wast.
Waster, 79/1, _s._ wasteful.
Water furrow, 19/7, _v. imp._ draw furrows across the ridges in the
lowest part of the ground to act as drains or water-courses. "A watir
furre, _elix_."--Cathol. Anglicum.
Water-retting, 16/25, _s._ retting is the process of steeping flax in
water to separate the fibres. "Rettyn tymber, hempe or other like,
_rigo, infundo_."--Prompt. Parv.
Wayest, 10/4, _v._ considerest.
Weather, 57/5, _v. imp._ dry in the open air.
Weene, 67/12, _v. pr. t._ think. A S. _wenan_.
Webster, 15/17, _s._ a weaver. A.S. _webbestre_, a female weaver.
*Wedehoke, 79, _s._ a weeding tool.
Weeles, 36/31, _s. pl._ snares or traps for fish made of osiers or
twigs. "A weele, a wicker net, wherewith fishes being once entred,
there is no way for them to get out; a bow net."--Nomenclator.
"There plenty is of roches, bleakes, or eeles,
Which fishermen catche in their nets and weeles."
--Newe Metamorphosis, 1600.
Wefte, 84/1, _s._ a loss.
Well a fine, 114/19, to a good end or purpose.
Welthines, 10/36, _s._ plenty, wealth.
Wenches, 57/34, _s. pl._ girls.
Wennel, 20/28, _s._ a calf just _weaned_. "A lambe, or a kidde, or a
_weanell_ wast."--Spenser, Shep. Cal. September.
Wether, 90/7, _s._ weather.
Wheat plums, 34/27, _s. pl._ a large fleshy plum, sometimes called the
bastard Orleans plum.
Wheele ladder, 17/6, _s._ "probably a frame on the side of a cart to
support hay or corn when the load is to be increased."--Mavor.
Whelpe, 95/2, _s._ child.
Whereas, 21/25, _adv._ wherever.
Whight, 15/12, _adj._ white.
Whinnes, 53/12, _s. pl._ whin, furze.
Whipstock, 21/14, _s._ the handle of a whip.
"Bought you a whistle, and a _whip-stalk_ too,
To be revenged on their villainies."
--Span. Tragedy, iii. 180.
Whist, 64*/10, _v._ be silent, be hushed. "Keepe the _whisht_, and
thou shalt heare it the sooner."--Terence in Eng. 1641.
Whit, 2/4, _s._ a point, no whit, not in the slightest degree. A.S.
_wiht_, a creature, thing. Gothic _waiht_.
Whitch, 35/6, which sort.
Whit leather, 17/4, _s._ leather dressed with alum, salt, etc.,
remarkable for its pliability and toughness. "I think I'm as hard as a
nut, and as tough as _whit-leather_."--Howitt.
Whitemeat, Whitmeat, 47/20, _s._ eggs, milk, butter, cheese, etc.
Wicket, 77/9, _s._ mouth.
Wight, 3/6, _s._ person, man. A.S. _wiht_. Gothic _waiht_.
Wild otes fantasie, 9/30*, the fancies or excesses of youth. Cf.
"sowing his wild oats."
Wiles, 114/18, _s. pl._ tricks, deceits.
Wilfull, 35/4, _adj._ ready, hasty.
Wimble, 17/6, _s._ auger. "An auger or _wimble_, wherwith holes are
bored, _terebra_ and _terebrum_."--Baret's Aluearie, 1580. _Gimlet_ is
the dimin. from _wimble_.
Wine, 51/21, _v. imp._ win, make to please.
Wit, 16/3, _s._ sense, good judgment. A.S. _witt_.
Wither, 57/20, _v._ dry.
Wonne, 75/3, _pp._ managed, made up.
Wood, 13/5, _adj._ mad. A.S. _wod_.
Woodrofe, 44/17, _s._ sweet woodruff, _Asperula odorata_. A.S.
_wudurôfe_.
Woodsere, 51/6, _s._ the month or season for cutting wood; but see next
word. "If wood be cut after the sunne decline from us till he come to
the equinoctial (which time they call _woodsere_), it will never grow
againe."--Heydon, Def. of Astrology, 1603.
Woodsere, 53/15, _s._ "By woodsere is meant decayed or hollow
Pollards."--T.R.; but in his note to this passage he says, "Woodsere is
the season of felling wood."--T.R.
Woorser, 10/32, Worser, 63/15, _adv._ worse, a double comparative. A.S.
_wyrsa_.
Woorth, 113/7, _s._ in worth = for what I am worth, _i.e._ as I can,
what I can get.
Wot, 94/4, _ v. pr. t._ ye know not what, an indefinite expression.
Wote, 10/21, _v. pr. t._ know. A.S. _witan_; _pt. t. Ic wat_, I know.
Wounder, 2/2, _s._ wounder, slayer. A.S. _wundian_, to wound.
Wrall, 101/4, _v. pr. t._ quarrel.
Wraught, 114/35, _pp._ supplied, furnished.
Wrauling, 92/1, _s._ quarrelling.
Wrecke, 115/2, _v._ wreak, vent. A.S. _wrecan_.
Wrest, 11/1, _v._ turn, force away.
Wrest, 10/61, _v._ steal away, plunder.
Wresting, 89/13, _s._ struggling for, fighting for.
Wright, 68/1, _v._ write.
Wringer, 2/13, _s._ extortioner.
Write, 86/10, _v. imp._ mark, write the name on.
Wud, 33/16, _s._ wood. A.S. _wudu_.
Wull, 35/21, _s._ wool. A.S. _wull_. Gothic _wulla_.
Yarn, 21/13, _v. pr. t._ earn. A.S. _gearnian_.
Yeane, 33/21, _v._ bring forth young. A.S. _eanian_.
Yeerlie, 63/21, _adv._ ? = yarely, readily. A.S. _gearu_. O. L. Ger.
_garu_.
Yerke, 64*/9, _v._ kick, wince. "They flirt, they _yerk_,
they backward fling."--Drayton. "_Tire_, a kick, yark, jerk,
jert."--Cotgrave.

Sustainable agriculture is farming in a way that reduces environmental harm, aids and expands natural resources and ensures that non-renewable resources are harnessed for productive purposes. It can be based on an understanding of ecosystem services. There are many methods to increase the sustainability of agriculture. When developing agriculture within the sustainable food systems, it is important to develop flexible business processes and farming practices.
Agriculture has an enormous environmental footprint, playing a significant role in causing climate change (food systems are responsible for one third of the anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions), water scarcity, water pollution, land degradation, deforestation and other processes; it is simultaneously causing environmental changes and being impacted by these changes. Sustainable agriculture consists of environment friendly methods of farming that allow the production of crops or livestock without causing damage to human or natural systems. It involves preventing adverse effects on soil, water, biodiversity, and surrounding or downstream resources, as well as to those working or living on the farm or in neighboring areas. Elements of sustainable agriculture can include permaculture, agroforestry, mixed farming, multiple cropping, and crop rotation. Land sparing, which combines conventional intensive agriculture with high yields and the protection of natural habitats from conversion to farmland, can also be considered a form of sustainable agriculture.
Developing sustainable food systems contributes to the sustainability of the human population. For example, one of the best ways to mitigate climate change is to create sustainable food systems based on sustainable agriculture. Sustainable agriculture provides a potential solution to enable agricultural systems to feed a growing population within the changing environmental conditions. Besides sustainable farming practices, dietary shifts to sustainable diets are an intertwined way to substantially reduce environmental impacts. Numerous sustainability standards and certification systems exist, including organic certification, Rainforest Alliance, Fair Trade, UTZ Certified, GlobalGAP, Bird Friendly, and the Common Code for the Coffee Community (4C).
== Definition ==
The term "sustainable agriculture" was defined in 1977 by the USDA as an integrated system of plant and animal production practices having a site-specific application that will, over the long term:
satisfy human food and fiber needs
enhance environmental quality and the natural resource base upon which the agriculture economy depends
make the most efficient use of nonrenewable resources and on-farm resources and integrate, where appropriate, natural biological cycles and controls
sustain the economic viability of farm operations
enhance the quality of life for farmers and society as a whole.
Yet the idea of having a sustainable relationship with the land has been prevalent in indigenous communities for centuries before the term was formally added to the lexicon.
== Aims ==
A common consensus is that sustainable farming is the most realistic way to feed growing populations. In order to successfully feed the population of the planet, farming practices must consider future costs–to both the environment and the communities they fuel. The risk of not being able to provide enough resources for everyone led to the adoption of technology within the sustainability field to increase farm productivity. The ideal result of this advancement is the ability to feed ever-growing populations across the world. The growing popularity of sustainable agriculture is connected to the wide-reaching fear that the planet's carrying capacity (or planetary boundaries), in terms of the ability to feed humanity, has been reached or even exceeded.
=== Key principles ===
There are several key principles associated with sustainability in agriculture:
The incorporation of biological and ecological processes such as nutrient cycling, soil regeneration, and nitrogen fixation into agricultural and food production practices.
Using decreased amounts of non-renewable and unsustainable inputs, particularly environmentally harmful ones.
Using the expertise of farmers to both productively work the land as well as to promote the self-reliance and self-sufficiency of farmers.
Solving agricultural and natural resource problems through the cooperation and collaboration of people with different skills. The problems tackled include pest management and irrigation.
It considers long-term as well as short-term economics because sustainability provides benefits that are indefinite, that is, agricultural environments that are designed to promote endless regeneration". It balances the need for resource conservation with the needs of farmers pursuing their livelihood.
It is considered to be reconciliation ecology, accommodating biodiversity within human landscapes.
Oftentimes, the execution of sustainable practices within farming comes through the adoption of technology and environmentally-focused appropriate technology.
== Technological approaches ==
Sustainable agricultural systems are becoming an increasingly important field for AI research and development. By leveraging AI's skills in areas such as resource optimization, crop health monitoring, and yield prediction, farmers might greatly advance toward more environmentally friendly agricultural practices. AI-controlled irrigation systems optimize water consumption by using sensors to monitor soil moisture levels and weather conditions to distribute water accordingly. This water management technology can lower water consumption up to 30%.
Artificial intelligence (AI) mobile soil analysis enables farmers to enhance soil fertility while decreasing their ecological footprint. This technology permits on-site, real-time evaluations of soil nutrient levels. Intelligent systems can detect weeds, pests, and plant disease to alert and develop strategies for increasing farming productivity.
A 2023 review article found that agroecology, a study on the biodiversity and ecological practices of farming, can become a mainstream model for transforming agriculture only if it integrates farming practices with regional and global scales, ensures economic viability for producers, and uses ecological methods with technologies such as digitalization and precision breeding. Agrivoltaics enhances sustainable agriculture by optimizing land use—allowing crops to be grown alongside solar panels, which generate clean energy. This dual-use approach conserves land resources, improves microclimates, and can promote more resilient, eco-friendly farming practices.
== Environmental factors ==
Practices that can cause long-term damage to soil include excessive tilling of the soil (leading to erosion) and irrigation without adequate drainage (leading to salinization).
The most important factors for a farming site are climate, soil, nutrients and water resources. Of the four, water and soil conservation are the most amenable to human intervention. When farmers grow and harvest crops, they remove some nutrients from the soil. Without replenishment, the land suffers from nutrient depletion and becomes either unusable or suffers from reduced yields. Sustainable agriculture depends on replenishing the soil while minimizing the use or need of non-renewable resources, such as natural gas or mineral ores.
Recent research has highlighted the importance of plant-associated microbiomes in sustainable agriculture. A study of wild and domesticated finger millet (Eleusine coracana) found that plant developmental stage, domestication, and root compartment significantly influence the assembly of root-associated microbial communities. The study showed that plants selectively recruit microbial taxa from surrounding soil communities according to their developmental needs, suggesting that microbiome-based approaches could contribute to sustainable crop production while reducing reliance on chemical fertilizers and pesticides.
A farm that can "produce perpetually", yet has negative effects on environmental quality elsewhere is not sustainable agriculture. An example of a case in which a global view may be warranted is the application of fertilizer or manure, which can improve the productivity of a farm but can pollute nearby rivers and coastal waters (eutrophication). The other extreme can also be undesirable, as the problem of low crop yields due to exhaustion of nutrients in the soil has been related to rainforest destruction. In Asia, the specific amount of land needed for sustainable farming is about 12.5 acres (5.1 ha) which include land for animal fodder, cereal production as a cash crop, and other food crops. In some cases, a small unit of aquaculture is included (AARI-1996).
=== Nutrients ===
==== Nitrates ====
Nitrates are used widely in farming as fertilizer. Unfortunately, a major environmental problem associated with agriculture is the leaching of nitrates into the environment. Possible sources of nitrates that would, in principle, be available indefinitely, include:
recycling crop waste and livestock or treated human manure
growing legume crops and forages such as peanuts or alfalfa that form symbioses with nitrogen-fixing bacteria called rhizobia
industrial production of nitrogen by the Haber process uses hydrogen, which is currently derived from natural gas (but this hydrogen could instead be made by electrolysis of water using renewable electricity)
genetically engineering (non-legume) crops to form nitrogen-fixing symbioses or fix nitrogen without microbial symbionts.
The last option was proposed in the 1970s, but is only gradually becoming feasible. Sustainable options for replacing other nutrient inputs such as phosphorus and potassium are more limited.
Other options include long-term crop rotations, returning to natural cycles that annually flood cultivated lands (returning lost nutrients) such as the flooding of the Nile, the long-term use of biochar, and use of crop and livestock landraces that are adapted to less than ideal conditions such as pests, drought, or lack of nutrients. Crops that require high levels of soil nutrients can be cultivated in a more sustainable manner with appropriate fertilizer management practices.
==== Phosphate ====
Phosphate is a primary component in fertilizer. It is the second most important nutrient for plants after nitrogen, and is often a limiting factor. It is important for sustainable agriculture as it can improve soil fertility and crop yields. Phosphorus is involved in all major metabolic processes including photosynthesis, energy transfer, signal transduction, macromolecular biosynthesis, and respiration. It is needed for root ramification and strength and seed formation, and can increase disease resistance.
Phosphorus is found in the soil in both inorganic and organic forms and makes up approximately 0.05% of soil biomass. Phosphorus fertilizers are the main input of inorganic phosphorus in agricultural soils and approximately 70%–80% of phosphorus in cultivated soils is inorganic. Long-term use of phosphate-containing chemical fertilizers causes eutrophication and deplete soil microbial life, so people have looked to other sources.
Phosphorus fertilizers are manufactured from rock phosphate. However, rock phosphate is a non-renewable resource and it is being depleted by mining for agricultural use: peak phosphorus will occur within the next few hundred years, or perhaps earlier.
==== Potassium ====
Potassium is a macronutrient very important for plant development and is commonly sought in fertilizers. This nutrient is essential for agriculture because it improves water retention, nutrient value, yield, taste, color, texture and disease resistance of crops. It is often used in the cultivation of grains, fruits, vegetables, rice, wheat, millets, sugar, corn, soybeans, palm oil and coffee.
Potassium chloride (KCl) represents the most widely source of K used in agriculture, accounting for 90% of all potassium produced for agricultural use.
The use of KCl leads to high concentrations of chloride (Clˉ) in soil harming its health due to the increase in soil salinity, imbalance in nutrient availability and this ion's biocidal effect for soil organisms. In consequences the development of plants and soil organisms is affected, putting at risk soil biodiversity and agricultural productivity. A sustainable option for replacing KCl are chloride-free fertilizers, its use should take into account plants' nutrition needs, and the promotion of soil health.
=== Soil ===
Land degradation is becoming a severe global problem. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: "About a quarter of the Earth's ice-free land area is subject to human-induced degradation (medium confidence). Soil erosion from agricultural fields is estimated to be currently 10 to 20 times (no tillage) to more than 100 times (conventional tillage) higher than the soil formation rate (medium confidence)." Almost half of the land on earth is covered with dry land, which is susceptible to degradation. Over a billion tonnes of southern Africa's soil are being lost to erosion annually, which if continued will result in halving of crop yields within thirty to fifty years. A comparative study of two adjacent wheat farms—one using sustainable practices and the other conventional methods—found that the sustainable farm had significantly better soil quality, including higher organic matter, microbial populations, and nutrient content, while also showing 22.4% higher net returns due to lower input costs, despite slightly lower yields.
Improper soil management is threatening the ability to grow sufficient food. Intensive agriculture reduces the carbon level in soil, impairing soil structure, crop growth and ecosystem functioning, and accelerating climate change. Modification of agricultural practices is a recognized method of carbon sequestration as soil can act as an effective carbon sink.
Soil management techniques include no-till farming, keyline design and windbreaks to reduce wind erosion, reincorporation of organic matter into the soil, reducing soil salinization, and preventing water run-off.
=== Land ===
As the global population increases and demand for food increases, there is pressure on land as a resource. In land-use planning and management, considering the impacts of land-use changes on factors such as soil erosion can support long-term agricultural sustainability, as shown by a study of Wadi Ziqlab, a dry area in the Middle East where farmers graze livestock and grow olives, vegetables, and grains.
Looking back over the 20th century shows that for people in poverty, following environmentally sound land practices has not always been a viable option due to many complex and challenging life circumstances. Currently, increased land degradation in developing countries may be connected with rural poverty among smallholder farmers when forced into unsustainable agricultural practices out of necessity.
Converting big parts of the land surface to agriculture has severe environmental and health consequences. For example, it leads to rise in zoonotic disease (like the Coronavirus disease 2019) due to the degradation of natural buffers between humans and animals, reducing biodiversity and creating larger groups of genetically similar animals.
Land is a finite resource on Earth. Although expansion of agricultural land can decrease biodiversity and contribute to deforestation, the picture is complex; for instance, a study examining the introduction of sheep by Norse settlers (Vikings) to the Faroe Islands of the North Atlantic concluded that, over time, the fine partitioning of land plots contributed more to soil erosion and degradation than grazing itself.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations estimates that in coming decades, cropland will continue to be lost to industrial and urban development, along with reclamation of wetlands, and conversion of forest to cultivation, resulting in the loss of biodiversity and increased soil erosion.
=== Energy ===
In modern agriculture, energy is used in on-farm mechanisation, food processing, storage, and transportation processes. It has therefore been found that energy prices are closely linked to food prices. Oil is also used as an input in agricultural chemicals. The International Energy Agency projects higher prices of non-renewable energy resources as a result of fossil fuel resources being depleted. It may therefore decrease global food security unless action is taken to 'decouple' fossil fuel energy from food production, with a move towards 'energy-smart' agricultural systems including renewable energy.
The use of solar powered irrigation in Pakistan is said to be a closed system for agricultural water irrigation.
The environmental cost of transportation could be avoided if people use local products.
=== Water ===
In some areas sufficient rainfall is available for crop growth, but many other areas require irrigation. For irrigation systems to be sustainable, they require proper management (to avoid salinization) and must not use more water from their source than is naturally replenishable. Otherwise, the water source effectively becomes a non-renewable resource. Improvements in water well drilling technology and submersible pumps, combined with the development of drip irrigation and low-pressure pivots, have made it possible to regularly achieve high crop yields in areas where reliance on rainfall alone had previously made successful agriculture unpredictable. However, this progress has come at a price. In many areas, such as the Ogallala Aquifer, the water is being used faster than it can be replenished.
According to the UC Davis Agricultural Sustainability Institute, several steps must be taken to develop drought-resistant farming systems even in "normal" years with average rainfall. These measures include both policy and management actions:
improving water conservation and storage measures
providing incentives for selection of drought-tolerant crop species
using reduced-volume irrigation systems
managing crops to reduce water loss
not planting crops at all.
Indicators for sustainable water resource development include the average annual flow of rivers from rainfall, flows from outside a country, the percentage of water coming from outside a country, and gross water withdrawal. It is estimated that agricultural practices consume 69% of the world's fresh water.
Farmers discovered a way to save water using wool in Wyoming and other parts of the United States.
== Social factors ==
=== Rural economic development ===
Sustainable agriculture attempts to solve multiple problems with one broad solution. The goal of sustainable agricultural practices is to decrease environmental degradation due to farming while increasing crop–and thus food–output. There are many varying strategies attempting to use sustainable farming practices in order to increase rural economic development within small-scale farming communities. Two of the most popular and opposing strategies within the modern discourse are allowing unrestricted markets to determine food production and deeming food a human right. Neither of these approaches have been proven to work without fail. A promising proposal to rural poverty reduction within agricultural communities is sustainable economic growth; the most important aspect of this policy is to regularly include the poorest farmers in the economy-wide development through the stabilization of small-scale agricultural economies.
In the early 1900's in rural America, Dr. George Washington Carver attempted to address rural poverty by teaching sustainable agricultural practices. He invented the Jesup Wagon, an agricultural school on wheels so Dr. Carver could reach the rural farmers and teach them sustainable farming at their own farms, giving the farmers hands-on practice and experience. Some of the teachings Dr. Carver brought to rural areas were breaking monoculture farming practices, typically of cotton, and teaching the importance of crop rotation, composting, and nutrients in the soil like nitrogen. Dr. Carver's teachings and impact lead to much of the modern day agricultural movements in the United States. His legacy continues as a part of the USDA's Agricultural Research Service (ARS) headquarters, which was named after him. There, they continue to expand upon Dr. Carver's focus on soil health and conservation in order to mitigate the causes and impacts of climate change.
In 2007, the United Nations reported on "Organic Agriculture and Food Security in Africa", stating that using sustainable agriculture could be a tool in reaching global food security without expanding land usage and reducing environmental impacts. There has been evidence provided by developing nations from the early 2000s stating that when people in their communities are not factored into the agricultural process that serious harm is done. The social scientist Charles Kellogg has stated that, "In a final effort, exploited people pass their suffering to the land." Sustainable agriculture mean the ability to permanently and continuously "feed its constituent populations".
There are a lot of opportunities that can increase farmers' profits, improve communities, and continue sustainable practices. For example, in Uganda, Genetically Modified Organisms were originally illegal. However, with the stress of banana crisis in Uganda, where Banana Bacterial Wilt had the potential to wipe out 90% of yield, they decided to explore GMOs as a possible solution. The government issued the National Biotechnology and Biosafety bill, which will allow scientists that are part of the National Banana Research Program to start experimenting with genetically modified organisms. This effort has the potential to help local communities because a significant portion live off the food they grow themselves, and it will be profitable because the yield of their main produce will remain stable.
Not all regions are suitable for agriculture. The technological advancement of the past few decades has allowed agriculture to develop in some of these regions. For example, Nepal has built greenhouses to deal with its high altitude and mountainous regions. Greenhouses allow for greater crop production and also use less water since they are closed systems.
Desalination techniques can turn salt water into fresh water which allows greater access to water for areas with a limited supply. This allows the irrigation of crops without decreasing natural fresh water sources. While desalination can be a tool to provide water to areas that need it to sustain agriculture, it requires money and resources. Regions of China have been considering large scale desalination in order to increase access to water, but the current cost of the desalination process makes it impractical.
=== Women ===
Women working in sustainable agriculture come from numerous backgrounds, ranging from academia to labor. From 1978 to 2007, in the United States, the number of women farm operators has tripled. In 2007, women operated 14 percent of farms, compared to five percent in 1978. Much of the growth is due to women farming outside of the "male dominated field of conventional agriculture".
=== Growing your own food ===
The practice of growing food in the backyard of houses, schools, etc., by families or by communities became widespread in the US at the time of World War I, the Great Depression and World War II, so that in one point of time 40% of the vegetables of the USA was produced in this way. The practice became more popular again in the time of the COVID-19 pandemic. This method permits to grow food in a relatively sustainable way and at the same time can make it easier for poor people to obtain food.
== Economic factors ==
Costs, such as environmental problems, not covered in traditional accounting systems (which take into account only the direct costs of production incurred by the farmer) are known as externalities.
Netting studied sustainability and intensive farming in smallholder systems through history.
There are several studies incorporating externalities such as ecosystem services, biodiversity, land degradation, and sustainable land management in economic analysis. These include The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity study and the Economics of Land Degradation Initiative which seek to establish an economic cost-benefit analysis on the practice of sustainable land management and sustainable agriculture.
Triple bottom line frameworks include social and environmental alongside a financial bottom line. A sustainable future can be feasible if growth in material consumption and population is slowed down and if there is a drastic increase in the efficiency of material and energy use. To make that transition, long- and short-term goals will need to be balanced enhancing equity and quality of life.
According to the report of United Nations from 2025, hunger increases globally for 6 years in a row. As funding become scarce, a possible solution is "investment in sustainable agriculture, which is four times more cost-effective than direct food assistance but only accounts for three percent of humanitarian funds."
== Challenges and debates ==
=== Barriers ===
The barriers to sustainable agriculture can be broken down and understood through three different dimensions. These three dimensions are seen as the core pillars to sustainability: social, environmental, and economic pillars. The social pillar addresses issues related to the conditions in which societies are born into, growing in, and learning from. It deals with shifting away from traditional practices of agricultural and moving into new sustainable practices that will create better societies and conditions. The environmental pillar addresses climate change and focuses on agricultural practices that protect the environment for future generations. The economic pillar discovers ways in which sustainable agriculture can be practiced while fostering economic growth and stability, with minimal disruptions to livelihoods. All three pillars must be addressed to determine and overcome the barriers preventing sustainable agricultural practices.
Social barriers to sustainable agriculture include cultural shifts, the need for collaboration, incentives, and new legislation. The move from conventional to sustainable agriculture will require significant behavioural changes from both farmers and consumers. Cooperation and collaboration between farmers is necessary to successfully transition to sustainable practices with minimal complications. This can be seen as a challenge for farmers who care about competition and profitability. There must also be an incentive for farmers to change their methods of agriculture. The use of public policy, advertisements, and laws that make sustainable agriculture mandatory or desirable can be utilized to overcome these social barriers.
Environmental barriers prevent the ability to protect and conserve the natural ecosystem. Examples of these barriers include the use of pesticides and the effects of climate change. Pesticides are widely used to combat pests that can devastate production and plays a significant role in keeping food prices and production costs low. To move toward sustainable agriculture, farmers are encouraged to utilize green pesticides, which cause less harm to both human health and habitats, but would entail a higher production cost. Climate change is also a rapidly growing barrier, one that farmers have little control over, which can be seen through place-based barriers. These place-based barriers include factors such as weather conditions, topography, and soil quality which can cause losses in production, resulting in the reluctance to switch from conventional practices. Many environmental benefits are also not visible or immediately evident. Significant changes such as lower rates of soil and nutrient loss, improved soil structure, and higher levels of beneficial microorganisms take time. In conventional agriculture, the benefits are easily visible with no weeds, pests, etc..., but the long term costs to the soil and surrounding ecosystems are hidden and "externalized". Conventional agricultural practices since the evolution of technology have caused significant damage to the environment through biodiversity loss, disrupted ecosystems, poor water quality, among other harms.
The economic obstacles to implementing sustainable agricultural practices include low financial return/profitability, lack of financial incentives, and negligible capital investments. Financial incentives and circumstances play a large role in whether sustainable practices will be adopted. The human and material capital required to shift to sustainable methods of agriculture requires training of the workforce and making investments in new technology and products, which comes at a high cost. In addition to this, farmers practicing conventional agriculture can mass-produce their crops, and therefore maximize their profitability. This would be difficult to do in sustainable agriculture which encourages low production capacity.
The author James Howard Kunstler claims almost all modern technology is bad and that there cannot be sustainability unless agriculture is done in ancient traditional ways. Efforts toward more sustainable agriculture are supported in the sustainability community, however, these are often viewed only as incremental steps and not as an end. One promising method of encouraging sustainable agriculture is through local farming and community gardens. Incorporating local produce and agricultural education into schools, communities, and institutions can promote the consumption of freshly grown produce which will drive consumer demand.
Some foresee a true sustainable steady state economy that may be very different from today's: greatly reduced energy usage, minimal ecological footprint, fewer consumer packaged goods, local purchasing with short food supply chains, little processed foods, more home and community gardens, etc.
=== Different viewpoints about the definition ===
There is a debate on the definition of sustainability regarding agriculture. The definition could be characterized by two different approaches: an ecocentric approach and a technocentric approach. The ecocentric approach emphasizes no- or low-growth levels of human development, and focuses on organic and biodynamic farming techniques with the goal of changing consumption patterns, and resource allocation and usage. The technocentric approach argues that sustainability can be attained through a variety of strategies, from the view that state-led modification of the industrial system like conservation-oriented farming systems should be implemented, to the argument that biotechnology is the best way to meet the increasing demand for food.
One can look at the topic of sustainable agriculture through two different lenses: multifunctional agriculture and ecosystem services. Both of these approaches are similar, but look at the function of agriculture differently. Those that employ the multifunctional agriculture philosophy focus on farm-centered approaches, and define function as being the outputs of agricultural activity. The central argument of multifunctionality is that agriculture is a multifunctional enterprise with other functions aside from the production of food and fiber. These functions include renewable resource management, landscape conservation and biodiversity. The ecosystem service-centered approach posits that individuals and society as a whole receive benefits from ecosystems, which are called "ecosystem services". In sustainable agriculture, the services that ecosystems provide include pollination, soil formation, and nutrient cycling, all of which are necessary functions for the production of food.
It is also claimed sustainable agriculture is best considered as an ecosystem approach to agriculture, called agroecology.
=== Ethics ===
Most agricultural professionals agree that there is a "moral obligation to pursue [the] goal [of] sustainability." The major debate comes from what system will provide a path to that goal because if an unsustainable method is used on a large scale it will have a massive negative effect on the environment and human population.
== Methods ==
Other practices include polyculture, growing a diverse number of perennial crops in a single field, each of which would grow in separate seasons so as not to compete with each other for natural resources. This system would result in increased resistance to diseases and decreased effects of erosion and loss of nutrients in the soil. Nitrogen fixation from legumes, for example, used in conjunction with plants that rely on nitrate from the soil for growth, helps to allow the land to be reused annually. Legumes will grow for a season and replenish the soil with ammonium and nitrate, and the next season other plants can be seeded and grown in the field in preparation for harvest.
Sustainable methods of weed management may help reduce the development of herbicide-resistant weeds. Crop rotation may also replenish nitrogen if legumes are used in the rotations and may also use resources more efficiently.
There are also many ways to practice sustainable animal husbandry. Some of the tools to grazing management include fencing off the grazing area into smaller areas called paddocks, lowering stock density, and moving the stock between paddocks frequently.
Within the realm of sustainable agriculture methods, the integration of different farming practices is gaining recognition for its potential to enhance efficiency and reduce environmental impact. For example, research on integrated wheat-fish farming in Egypt has demonstrated increased overall productivity and potential for reduced reliance on external inputs. This approach, aligning with principles seen in other integrated systems like rice-fish culture, underscores the value of diversifying the combing farming activities for greater sustainability.
=== Intensification ===
An increased production is a goal of intensification. Sustainable intensification encompasses specific agriculture methods that increase production and at the same time help improve environmental outcomes. The desired outcomes of the farm are achieved without the need for more land cultivation or destruction of natural habitat; the system performance is upgraded with no net environmental cost. Sustainable Intensification has become a priority for the United Nations. Sustainable intensification differs from prior intensification methods by specifically placing importance on broader environmental outcomes. By 2018; it was predicted in 100 nations a combined total of 163 million farms used sustainable intensification. The amount of agricultural land covered by this is 453 million ha of land. That amount of land is equal to 29% of farms worldwide. In light of concerns about food security, human population growth and dwindling land suitable for agriculture, sustainable intensive farming practises are needed to maintain high crop yields, while maintaining soil health and ecosystem services. The capacity for ecosystem services to be strong enough to allow a reduction in use of non-renewable inputs whilst maintaining or boosting yields has been the subject of much debate. Recent work in irrigated rice production system of east Asia has suggested that – in relation to pest management at least – promoting the ecosystem service of biological control using nectar plants can reduce the need for insecticides by 70% whilst delivering a 5% yield advantage compared with standard practice.
Vertical farming is a concept with the potential advantages of year-round production, isolation from pests and diseases, controllable resource recycling and reduced transportation costs.
=== Water ===
Water efficiency can be improved by reducing the need for irrigation and using alternative methods. Such methods include: researching on drought resistant crops, monitoring plant transpiration and reducing soil evaporation.
Drought resistant crops have been researched extensively as a means to overcome the issue of water shortage. They are modified genetically so they can adapt in an environment with little water. This is beneficial as it reduces the need for irrigation and helps conserve water. Although they have been extensively researched, significant results have not been achieved as most of the successful species will have no overall impact on water conservation. However, some grains like rice, for example, have been successfully genetically modified to be drought resistant.
=== Soil and nutrients ===
Soil amendments include using compost from recycling centers. Using compost from yard and kitchen waste uses available resources in the area.
Abstinence from soil tillage before planting and leaving the plant residue after harvesting reduces soil water evaporation; It also serves to prevent soil erosion.
Crop residues left covering the surface of the soil may result in reduced evaporation of water, a lower surface soil temperature, and reduction of wind effects.
A way to make rock phosphate more effective is to add microbial inoculates such as phosphate-solubilizing microorganisms, known as PSMs, to the soil. These solubilize phosphorus already in the soil and use processes like organic acid production and ion exchange reactions to make that phosphorus available for plants. Experimentally, these PSMs have been shown to increase crop growth in terms of shoot height, dry biomass and grain yield.
Phosphorus uptake is even more efficient with the presence of mycorrhizae in the soil. Mycorrhiza is a type of mutualistic symbiotic association between plants and fungi, which are well-equipped to absorb nutrients, including phosphorus, in soil. These fungi can increase nutrient uptake in soil where phosphorus has been fixed by aluminum, calcium, and iron. Mycorrhizae can also release organic acids that solubilize otherwise unavailable phosphorus.
=== Pests and weeds ===
Soil steaming can be used as an alternative to chemicals for soil sterilization. Different methods are available to induce steam into the soil to kill pests and increase soil health.
Solarizing is based on the same principle, used to increase the temperature of the soil to kill pathogens and pests.
Certain plants can be cropped for use as biofumigants, "natural" fumigants, releasing pest suppressing compounds when crushed, ploughed into the soil, and covered in plastic for four weeks. Plants in the Brassicaceae family release large amounts of toxic compounds such as methyl isothiocyanates.
=== Location ===
Relocating current croplands to environmentally more optimal locations, whilst allowing ecosystems in then-abandoned areas to regenerate could substantially decrease the current carbon, biodiversity, and irrigation water footprint of global crop production, with relocation only within national borders also having substantial potential.
=== Plants ===
Sustainability may also involve crop rotation. Crop rotation and cover crops prevent soil erosion, by protecting topsoil from wind and water. Effective crop rotation can reduce pest pressure on crops, provides weed control, reduces disease build up, and improves the efficiency of soil nutrients and nutrient cycling. This reduces the need for fertilizers and pesticides. Increasing the diversity of crops by introducing new genetic resources can increase yields by 10 to 15 percent compared to when they are grown in monoculture. Perennial crops reduce the need for tillage and thus help mitigate soil erosion, and may sometimes tolerate drought better, increase water quality and help increase soil organic matter. There are research programs attempting to develop perennial substitutes for existing annual crops, such as replacing wheat with the wild grass Thinopyrum intermedium, or possible experimental hybrids of it and wheat. Being able to do all of this without the use of chemicals is one of the main goals of sustainability which is why crop rotation is a very central method of sustainable agriculture.
== Landscape management strategies ==
Sustainable agriculture is not limited to practices within individual plots but can also be considered at the landscape scale. This broader approach is particularly relevant for reconciling biodiversity conservation while maintaining sufficient agricultural production. In this context, two landscape management strategies are traditionally opposed: land sparing and land sharing. These two strategies have generated intense debate within the scientific community for over a decade, with no clear consensus emerging on their relative effectiveness in balancing biodiversity conservation with food production and rural livelihoods. A literature review of empirical studies indicates that land sparing is generally favored for conserving tropical forest biodiversity (67% of relevant studies), whereas land sharing (58% of studies) is more often considered more beneficial for the food security and livelihoods of farmers in developing countries. Recently, a third alternative has been introduced to the debate: the so-called land blending strategy, an intermediate approach between the two traditional ones, as the effectiveness of both strategies appears to vary depending on the landscape context.
=== Land sparing ===
Land sparing is a strategy that involves strictly separating land dedicated to agricultural production from land dedicated to conservation of natural habitats. This strategy promotes increasing the yield of agricultural land, particularly through intensive farming. This is done to preserve areas of major biodiversity interest from agricultural expansion. This has been the dominant strategy in developed countries for over 150 years.
=== Land sharing ===
Land sharing, also known as "wildlife-friendly agriculture", involves integrating biodiversity into agricultural production areas. This approach focuses on the combination of agriculture and biodiversity by reducing the intensification of farming practices. This is illustrated notably by agroecological practices such as agroforestry and mixed crop-livestock systems.
=== Land blending ===
Previously described as a "mixed strategy", a term considered too ambiguous in ecology, land blending is an intermediate approach between land sparing and land sharing. Unlike these two traditionally opposed strategies, land blending offers a flexible combination of the two approaches, adapted to the specific landscape features. This third strategy has only recently emerged as a credible and viable alternative to the traditional land sparing and land sharing. Recent research has highlighted its potential for effectively reconciling biodiversity conservation and agricultural production, while enhancing resilience in the face of change and uncertainty.
== Related concepts ==
Organic agriculture can be defined as:
an integrated farming system that strives for sustainability, the enhancement of soil fertility and biological diversity whilst, with rare exceptions, prohibiting synthetic pesticides, antibiotics, synthetic fertilizers, genetically modified organisms, and growth hormones.
Some claim organic agriculture may produce the most sustainable products available for consumers in the US, where no other alternatives exist, although the focus of the organics industry is not sustainability.
In 2018 the sales of organic products in USA reach $52.5 billion. According to a USDA survey, two-thirds of Americans consume organic products at least occasionally. Recent syntheses estimate that carbon dioxide emissions from land-use change and forestry are about 3–4 GtCO2 per year, contributing roughly 10–12% of total anthropogenic CO2 emissions in recent years.
=== Ecological farming ===
Ecological farming is a concept that focused on the environmental aspects of sustainable agriculture. Ecological farming includes all methods, including organic, which regenerate ecosystem services like: prevention of soil erosion, water infiltration and retention, carbon sequestration in the form of humus, and increased biodiversity. Many techniques are used including no-till farming, multispecies cover crops, strip cropping, terrace cultivation, shelter belts, pasture cropping etc.
There are a plethora of methods and techniques that are employed when practicing ecological farming, all having their own unique benefits and implementations that lead to more sustainable agriculture. Crop genetic diversity is one method that is used to reduce the risks associated with monoculture crops, which can be susceptible to a changing climate. This form of biodiversity causes crops to be more resilient, increasing food security and enhancing the productivity of the field on a long-term scale. The use of biodigestors is another method which converts organic waste into a combustible gas, which can provide several benefits to an ecological farm: it can be used as a fuel source, fertilizer for crops and fish ponds, and serves as a method for removing wastes that are rich in organic matter. Because biodigestors can be used as fertilizer, it reduces the amount of industrial fertilizers that are needed to sustain the yields of the farm. Another technique used is aquaculture integration, which combines fish farming with agricultural farming, using the wastes from animals and crops and diverting them towards the fish farms to be used up instead of being leeched into the environment. Mud from the fish ponds can also be used to fertilize crops.
Organic fertilizers can also be employed in an ecological farm, such as animal and green manure. This allows soil fertility to be improved and well-maintained, leads to reduced costs and increased yields, reduces the usage of non-renewable resources in industrial fertilizers (Nitrogen and Phosphorus), and reduces the environmental pressures that are posed by intensive agricultural systems. Precision Agriculture can also be used, which focuses on efficient removal of pests using non-chemical techniques and minimizes the amount of tilling needed to sustain the farm. An example of a precision machine is the false seedbed tiller, which can remove a great majority of small weeds while only tilling one centimeter deep. This minimized tilling reduces the amount of new weeds that germinate from soil disturbance. Other methods that reduce soil erosion include contour farming, strip cropping, and terrace cultivation.
==== Benefits ====
Ecological farming involves the introduction of symbiotic species, where possible, to support the ecological sustainability of the farm. Associated benefits include a reduction in ecological debt and elimination of dead zones.
Ecological farming is a pioneering, practical development which aims to create globally sustainable land management systems, and encourages review of the importance of maintaining biodiversity in food production and farming end products.
One foreseeable option is to develop specialized automata to scan and respond to soil and plant situations relative to intensive care for the soil and the plants. Accordingly, conversion to ecological farming may best utilize the information age, and become recognised as a primary user of robotics and expert systems.
==== Challenges ====
The challenge for ecological farming science is to be able to achieve a mainstream productive food system that is sustainable or even regenerative. To enter the field of ecological farming, location relative to the consumer, can reduce the food miles factor to help minimise damage to the biosphere by combustion engine emissions involved in current food transportation.
Design of the ecological farm is initially constrained by the same limitations as conventional farming: local climate, the soil's physical properties, budget for beneficial soil supplements, manpower and available automatons; however long-term water management by ecological farming methods is likely to conserve and increase water availability for the location, and require far fewer inputs to maintain fertility.
==== Principles ====
Certain principles unique to ecological farming need to be considered.
Food production should be ecological in both origin and destiny (the term destiny refers to the post-harvest ecological footprint which results in getting produce to the consumer).
Integration of species that maintain ecosystem services whilst providing a selection of alternative products.
Minimise food miles, packaging, energy consumption and waste.
Define a new ecosystem to suit human needs using lessons from existing ecosystems from around the world.
Apply the value of a knowledge-base (advanced data base) about soil microorganisms so that discoveries of the ecological benefits of having various kinds of microorganisms encouraged in productive systems such as Forest Gardens can be assessed and optimised; for example in the case of naturally occurring microorganisms called denitrifiers.
=== Traditional agriculture ===
Often thought of as inherently destructive, slash-and-burn or slash-and-char shifting cultivation have been practiced in the Amazon for thousands of years.
Some traditional systems combine polyculture with sustainability. In South-East Asia, rice-fish systems on rice paddies have raised freshwater fish as well as rice, producing an additional product and reducing eutrophication of neighboring rivers. A variant in Indonesia combines rice, fish, ducks and water fern; the ducks eat the weeds that would otherwise limit rice growth, saving labor and herbicides, while the duck and fish manure substitute for fertilizer.
Raised field agriculture has been recently revived in certain areas of the world, such as the Altiplano region in Bolivia and Peru. This has resurged in the form of traditional Waru Waru raised fields, which create nutrient-rich soil in regions where such soil is scarce. This method is extremely productive and has recently been utilized by indigenous groups in the area and the nearby Amazon Basin to make use of lands that have been historically hard to cultivate.
Other forms of traditional agriculture include agro forestry, crop rotations, and water harvesting. Water harvesting is one of the largest and most common practices, particularly used in dry areas and seasons. In Ethiopia, over half of their GDP and over 80 percent of their exports are attributed to agriculture; yet, it is known for its intense droughts and dry periods. Rain water harvesting is considered to be a low-cost alternative. This type of harvesting collects and stores water from roof tops during high-rain periods for use during droughts. Rainwater harvesting has been a large practice to help the country survive by focusing on runoff irrigation, roof water harvesting, and flood spreading.
==== Indigenous Agriculture in North America ====
Native Americans in the United States practiced sustainable agriculture through their subsistence farming techniques. Many tribes grew or harvested their own food from plants that thrived in their local ecosystems. Native American farming practices are specific to local environments and work with natural processes. This is a practice called Permaculture, and it involves a deep understanding of the local environment. Native American farming techniques also incorporate local biodiversity into many of their practices, which helps the land remain healthy.
Many indigenous tribes incorporated intercropping into their agriculture, which is a practice where multiple crops are planted together in the same area. This strategy allows crops to help one another grow through exchanged nutrients, maintained soil moisture, and physical supports for one another. The crops that are paired in intercropping often do not heavily compete for resources, which helps them to each be successful. For example, many tribes utilized intercropping in ways such as the Three Sisters Garden. This gardening technique consists of corn, beans, and squash. These crops grow in unity as the corn stalk supports the beans, the beans produce nitrogen, and the squash retain moisture. Intercropping also provides a natural strategy for pest management and the prevention of weed growth. Intercropping is a natural agricultural practice that often improves the overall health of the soil and plants, increases crop yield, and is sustainable.
One of the most significant aspects of indigenous sustainable agriculture is their traditional ecological knowledge of harvesting. The Anishinaabe tribes follow an ideology known as "the Honorable Harvest". The Honorable Harvest is a set of practices that emphasize the idea that people should "take only what you need and use everything you take." Resources are conserved through this practice because several rules are followed when harvesting a plant. These rules are to never take the first plant, never take more than half of the plants, and never take the last plant. This encourages future growth of the plant and therefore leads to a sustainable use of the plants in the area.
Native Americans practiced agroforestry by managing the forest, animals, and crops together. They also helped promote tree growth through controlled burns and silviculture. Often, the remaining ash from these burns would be used to fertilize their crops. By improving the conditions of the forest, the local wildlife populations also increased. Native Americans allowed their livestock to graze in the forest, which provided natural fertilizer for the trees as well.
=== Regenerative agriculture ===
Regenerative agriculture is a conservation and rehabilitation approach to food and farming systems. It focuses on topsoil regeneration, increasing biodiversity, improving the water cycle, enhancing ecosystem services, supporting biosequestration, increasing resilience to climate change, and strengthening the health and vitality of farm soil. Practices include, recycling as much farm waste as possible, and adding composted material from sources outside the farm. In recent years this regenerative approach to agriculture has been gaining momentum across food system actors such as farmers and industries.
=== Alternative methods ===
==== Permaculture ====
==== Polyculture ====
There is limited evidence polyculture may contribute to sustainable agriculture. A meta-analysis of a number of polycrop studies found that predator insect biodiversity was higher at comparable yields than conventional in certain two-crop systems with a single cash crop combined with a cover crop.
One approach to sustainability is to develop polyculture systems using perennial crop varieties. Such varieties are being developed for rice, wheat, sorghum, barley, and sunflowers. If these can be combined in polyculture with a leguminous cover crop such as alfalfa, fixation of nitrogen will be added to the system, reducing the need for fertilizer and pesticides.
==== Local small-scale agriculture ====
The use of available city space (e.g., rooftop gardens, community gardens, garden sharing, organopónicos, and other forms of urban agriculture) may be able to contribute to sustainability. Some consider "guerrilla gardening" an example of sustainability in action – in some cases seeds of edible plants have been sown in local rural areas.
==== Hydroponics or soil-less culture ====
Hydroponics is an alternative to agriculture that creates the ideal environment with water for optimal growth without using a dormant medium. This innovative farming technique produces higher crop yields without compromising soil health. The most significant drawback of this sustainable farming technique is the cost associated with development.
== Standards ==
Certification systems are important to the agriculture community and to consumers as these standards determine the sustainability of produce. Numerous sustainability standards and certification systems exist, including organic certification, Rainforest Alliance, Fair Trade, UTZ Certified, GlobalGAP, Bird Friendly, and the Common Code for the Coffee Community (4C). These standards specify rules that producers, manufacturers and traders need to follow so that the things they do, make, or grow do not hurt people and the environment. These standards are also known as Voluntary Sustainability Standards (VSS) that are private standards that require products to meet specific economic, social or environmental sustainability metrics. The requirements can refer to product quality or attributes, but also to production and processing methods, as well as transportation.
VSS are mostly designed and marketed by non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or private firms and they are adopted by actors up and down the value chain, from farmers to retailers. Certifications and labels are used to signal the successful implementation of a VSS. According to the ITC standards map the mostly covered products by standards are agricultural products. Around 500 VSS today apply to key exports of many developing countries, such as coffee, tea, bananas, cocoa, palm oil, timber, cotton, and organic agri-foods. VSS are found to reduce eutrophication, water use, greenhouse gas emissions, and natural ecosystem conversion. And thus are considered as a potential tool for sustainable agriculture.
The USDA produces an organic label that is supported by nationalized standards of farmers and facilities. The steps for certification consist of creating an organic system plan, which determines how produce will be tilled, grazed, harvested, stored, and transported. This plan also manages and monitors the substances used around the produce, the maintenance needed to protect the produce, and any nonorganic products that may come in contact with the produce. The organic system plan is then reviewed and inspected by the USDA certifying agent. Once the certification is granted, the produce receives an approval sticker from the USDA and the produce is distributed across the U.S. In order to hold farmers accountable and ensure that Americans are receiving organic produce, these inspections are done at least once a year. This is just one example of sustainable certification systems through produce maintenance.
== Policy ==
Sustainable agriculture is a topic in international policy concerning its potential to reduce environmental risks. In 2011, the Commission on Sustainable Agriculture and Climate Change, as part of its recommendations for policymakers on achieving food security in the face of climate change, urged that sustainable agriculture must be integrated into national and international policy.
The Commission stressed that increasing weather variability and climate shocks will negatively affect agricultural yields, necessitating early action to drive change in agricultural production systems towards increasing resilience. It also called for dramatically increased investments in sustainable agriculture in the next decade, including in national research and development budgets, land rehabilitation, economic incentives, and infrastructure improvement.
=== At the global level ===
During 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference, 45 countries pledged to give more than 4 billion dollars for transition to sustainable agriculture. The organization "Slow Food" expressed concern about the effectivity of the spendings, as they concentrate on technological solutions and reforestation en place of "a holistic agroecology that transforms food from a mass-produced commodity into part of a sustainable system that works within natural boundaries."
Additionally, the Summit consisted of negotiations that led to heavily reducing CO2 emissions, becoming carbon neutral, ending deforestation and reliance on coal, and limiting methane emissions.
In November, the Climate Action Tracker reported that global efforts are on track to for a 2.7 °C temperature increase with current policies, finding that the current targets will not meet global needs as coal and natural gas consumption are primarily responsible for the gap in progress. Since, like-minded developing countries, like those in Africa, asked for an addendum to the agreement that removed the obligation for developing countries to meet the same requirements of wealthy nations.
=== European Union ===
In May 2020 the European Union published a program, named "From Farm to Fork" for making its agriculture more sustainable. In the official page of the program From Farm to Fork is cited Frans Timmermans the Executive Vice-President of the European Commission, saying that:
The coronavirus crisis has shown how vulnerable we all are, and how important it is to restore the balance between human activity and nature. At the heart of the Green Deal the Biodiversity and Farm to Fork strategies point to a new and better balance of nature, food systems, and biodiversity; to protect our people's health and well-being, and at the same time to increase the EU's competitiveness and resilience. These strategies are a crucial part of the great transition we are embarking upon.
The program includes the next targets:
Making 25% of EU agriculture organic, by 2030.
Reduce by 50% the use of pesticides by 2030.
Reduce the use of fertilizers by 20% by 2030.
Reduce nutrient loss by at least 50%.
Reduce the use of antimicrobials in agriculture and antimicrobials in aquaculture by 50% by 2030.
Create sustainable food labeling.
Reduce food waste by 50% by 2030.
Dedicate to R&I related to the issue €10 billion.
=== United States ===
Policies from 1930 to 2000
The New Deal implemented policies and programs that promoted sustainable agriculture. Under the Agriculture Adjustment Act of 1933, it provided farmers payments to create a supply management regime that capped production of important crops. This allowed farmers to focus on growing food and not competing in the market based system. The New Deal also provided a monetary incentive for farmers that left some of their fields unsown or ungrazed to order to improve the soil conditions. The Cooperative Extension Service was also established that set up sharing funding responsibilities amongst the USDA, land-grant universities, and local communities.
The 1950s to 1990s was when the government switched its stance on agriculture policy which halted sustainable agriculture. The Agricultural Act of 1954 passed which supported farmers with flexible price supports, but only to commodity programs. The Food and Agricultural Act of 1965 had new income support payments and continued supply controls but reduced priced supports. Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of 1973 removed price supports and instead introduced target prices and deficiency payments. It continued to promote commodity crops by lowering interest rates. Food Security Act of 1985 continued commodity loan programs. These policies incentivized profit over sustainability because the US government was promoting farms to maximize their production output instead of placing checks. This meant that farms were being turned into food factories as they became bigger in size and grew more commodity crops like corn, wheat, and cotton. From 1900 to 2002, the number of farms in the US decreased significantly while the average size of a farm went up after 1950. The U.S was almost annually setting new records in crop-production and labor efficiency for 40 years after WWII.
Current policies
In the United States, the federal Natural Resources Conservation Service (USDA) provides technical and financial assistance for those interested in pursuing natural resource conservation along with production agriculture. With programs like SARE and China-UK SAIN to help promote research on sustainable agriculture practices and a framework for agriculture and climate change respectively.
Future policies
Currently, there are policies on the table that could move the US agriculture system into a more sustainable direction with the Green New Deal. This policy promotes decentralizing agrarian governance by breaking up large commodity farms that were created in the 1950s to 1980s. Decentralized governance within the farming community would allow for more adaptive management at local levels to help focus on climate change mitigation, food security, and landscape-scale ecological stewardship. The Green New Deal would invest in public infrastructure to support farmers transition from industrial food regime and acquire agroecological skills. Just like in the New Deal, it would invest in cooperatives and commons to share and redistribute resources like land, food, equipment, research facilities, personnel, and training programs. All of these policies and programs would break down barriers that have prevented sustainable farmers and agriculture from taking place in the United States.
=== Current movements in the U.S. ===
In the United States there has been a movement with key advocates like Leah Penniman for sustainable agriculture. Leah Penniman has been a science teacher, farmer, writer, and Co-Founder of Soul Fire Farm. Soul Fire Farm uses regenerative agriculture and many of the techniques invented by George Washington Carver. Penniman wrote the book Farming While Black: Soul Fire Farm's Practical Guide to Liberation on the Land which guides African-heritage farmers on Afro-Indigenous sustainable farming practices while highlighting their historical contributions to sustainable agriculture as well. The community farm built by Penniman is also a training center whose goal is to end racism in agriculture.
Like Penniman, Dr. Monica M. White has been advocating for the use of more sustainable agriculture. Her focus has been on the expansion of urban agriculture and how it's more sustainable in a food desert, such as Detroit. Members of the community in Detroit, referred to as D-Town, offer workshops about healthy food choices, composting, and "the importance of sustainable agriculture."
=== Asia ===
==== China ====
In 2016, the Chinese government adopted a plan to reduce China's meat consumption by 50%, for achieving more sustainable and healthy food system.
In 2019, the National Basic Research Program or Program 973 funded research into Science and Technology Backyard (STB). STBs are hubs often created in rural areas with significant rates of small-scale farming that combine knowledge of traditional practices with new innovations and technology implementation. The purpose of this program was to invest in sustainable farming throughout the country and increase food production while achieving few negative environmental effects. The program was ultimately proven to be successful, and the study found that the merging of traditional practices and appropriate technology was instrumental in higher crop yields.
==== India ====
In collaboration with the Food and Land Use Coalition (FOLU), CEEW (council for energy, environment and water), has given an overview of the current state of sustainable agriculture practices and systems (SAPSs) in India. India is aiming to scale-up SAPs, through policymakers, administrators, philanthropists, and other which represent a vital alternative to conventional, input-intensive agriculture. In idea these efforts identify 16 SAPSs – including agroforestry, crop rotation, rainwater harvesting, organic farming and natural farming – using agroecology as an investigative lens. In a conclusive understanding it is realised that sustainable agriculture is far from mainstream in India. Further proposals for several measures for promoting SAPSs, including restructured government support and rigorous evidence generation for benefits and implementation of sustainable farming are ongoing progress in Indian Agriculture.
An example of initiatives in India towards exploring the world of sustainable farming has been set by the Sowgood foundation which is a nonprofit founded by educator Pragati Chaswal. It started by teaching primary school children about sustainable farming by helping them farm on small farm strips in suburban farmhouses and gardens. Today many government and private schools in Delhi, India have adopted the sowgood foundation curriculum for sustainable farming for their students.
=== Other countries ===
==== Israel ====
In 2012, the Israeli Ministry of Agriculture found itself at the height of the Israeli commitment to sustainable agriculture policy. A large factor of this policy was funding programs that made sustainable agriculture accessible to smaller Palestinian-Arab communities. The program was meant to create biodiversity, train farmers in sustainable agriculture methods, and hold regular meetings for agriculture stakeholders.
== History ==
In 1907, the American author Franklin H. King discussed in his book Farmers of Forty Centuries the advantages of sustainable agriculture and warned that such practices would be vital to farming in the future. The phrase 'sustainable agriculture' was reportedly coined by the Australian agronomist Gordon McClymont. The term became popular in the late 1980s. There was an international symposium on sustainability in horticulture by the International Society of Horticultural Science at the International Horticultural Congress in Toronto in 2002. At the following conference at Seoul in 2006, the principles were discussed further.
This potential future inability to feed the world's population has been a concern since the English political economist Thomas Malthus in the early 1800s, but has become increasingly important recently. Starting at the very end of the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, this issue became widely discussed in the U.S. because of growing anxieties of a rapidly increasing global population. Agriculture has long been the biggest industry worldwide and requires significant land, water, and labor inputs. At the turn of the twenty-first century, experts questioned the industry's ability to keep up with population growth. This debate led to concerns over global food insecurity and "solving hunger".
== See also ==
Agroecology
Climate-smart agriculture
Environmental impact of meat production
Sustainable development
Sustainable energy
Sustainable food system
Sustainable landscaping
== References ==
== Sources ==
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0 (license statement/permission). Text taken from The State of the World's Biodiversity for Food and Agriculture − In Brief​, FAO, FAO.

The history of agriculture in India dates back to the Neolithic period. India ranks second worldwide in farm outputs. As per the Indian economic survey 2020–21, agriculture employed more than 50% of the Indian workforce and contributed 20.2% to the country's GDP.
In 2016, agriculture and allied sectors like animal husbandry, forestry and fisheries accounted for 17.5% of the GDP (gross domestic product) with about 41.49% of the workforce in 2020. India ranks first in the world with highest net cropped area followed by US and China. The economic contribution of agriculture to India's GDP is steadily declining with the country's broad-based economic growth. Still, agriculture is demographically the broadest economic sector and plays a significant role in the overall socio-economic fabric of India.
The total agriculture commodities export was US$3.50 billion in March–June 2020. India exported $38 billion worth of agricultural products in 2013, making it the seventh-largest agricultural exporter worldwide and the sixth largest net exporter. Most of its agriculture exports serve developing and least developed nations. Indian agricultural/horticultural and processed foods are exported to more than 120 countries, primarily to Japan, Southeast Asia, SAARC countries, the European Union and the United States.
Pesticides and fertilizers used in Indian agriculture have helped increase crop productivity, but their unregulated and excessive use has caused different ecosystem and fatal health problems. Several studies published between 2011 and 2020 attribute 45 different types of cancers afflicting rural farm workers in India to pesticide usage. The chemicals have been shown to cause DNA damage, hormone disruption, and lead to a weakened immune system. Occupational exposure to pesticides has been identified as a major trigger of the development of cancer. The principal classes of pesticides investigated in relation to their role in intoxication and cancer were insecticides, herbicides, and fungicides. Punjab, a state in India, utilises the highest amount of chemical fertilizers in the country. Many of the pesticides sprayed on the state's crops are classified as class I by the World Health Organization because of their acute toxicity and are banned in places around the world, including Europe.
== Definition of farmer ==
Indian farmers are people who grow crops as a profession. Various government estimates (Census, Agricultural Census, National Sample Survey assessments, and Periodic Labour Force Surveys) give a different number of farmers in the country ranging from 37 million to 118 million as per the different definitions. Some definitions take into account the number of holdings as compared to the number of farmers. Other definitions take into account possession of land, while others try to delink land ownership from the definition of a farmer. Other terms also used include 'cultivator'.
India's National Policy for Farmers 2007 defines farmer as:
For the purpose of this Policy, the term "FARMER" will refer to a person actively engaged in the economic and/or livelihood activity of growing crops and producing other primary agricultural commodities and will include all agricultural operational holders, cultivators, agricultural labourers, sharecroppers, tenants, poultry and livestock rearers, fishers, beekeepers, gardeners, pastoralists, non-corporate planters and planting labourers, as well as persons engaged in various farmingrelated occupations such as sericulture, vermiculture, and agro-forestry. The term will also include tribal families / persons engaged in shifting cultivation and in the collection, use and sale of timber and non-timber forest produce.
However this definition has not been adopted.
== Overview ==
As per the 2014 FAO world agriculture statistics India is the world's largest producer of many fresh fruits like banana, mango, guava, papaya, lemon and vegetables like chickpea, okra and milk, major spices like chili pepper, ginger, fibrous crops such as jute, staples such as millets and castor oil seed. India is the second largest producer of wheat and rice, the world's major food staples.
India is currently the world's second largest producer of several dry fruits, agriculture-based textile raw materials, roots and tuber crops, pulses, farmed fish, eggs, coconut, sugarcane and numerous vegetables. India is ranked under the world's five largest producers of over 80% of agricultural produce items, including many cash crops such as coffee and cotton, in 2010. India is one of the world's five largest producers of livestock and poultry meat, with one of the fastest growth rates, as of 2011.
One report from 2008 claimed that India's population is growing faster than its ability to produce rice and wheat. While other recent studies claim that India can easily feed its growing population, plus produce wheat and rice for global exports, if it can reduce food staple spoilage/wastage, improve its infrastructure and raise its farm productivity like those achieved by other developing countries such as Brazil and China.
In fiscal year ending June 2011, with a normal monsoon season, Indian agriculture accomplished an all-time record production of 85.9 million tonnes of wheat, a 6.4% increase from a year earlier. Rice output in India hit a new record at 95.3 million tonnes, a 7% increase from the year earlier. Lentils and many other food staples production also increased year over year. Indian farmers, thus produced about 71 kilograms of wheat and 80 kilograms of rice for every member of Indian population in 2011. The per capita supply of rice every year in India is now higher than the per capita consumption of rice every year in Japan.
India exported $39 billion worth of agricultural products in 2013, making it the seventh largest agricultural exporter worldwide, and the sixth largest net exporter. This represents explosive growth, as in 2004 net exports were about $5 billion. India is the fastest growing exporter of agricultural products over a 10-year period, its $39 billion of net export is more than double the combined exports of the European Union (EU-28). It has become one of the world's largest supplier of rice, cotton, sugar and wheat. India exported around 2 million metric tonnes of wheat and 2.1 million metric tonnes of rice in 2011 to Africa, Nepal, Bangladesh and other regions around the world.
Aquaculture and catch fishery is among the fastest growing industries in India. Between 1990 and 2010, the Indian fish capture harvest doubled, while aquaculture harvest tripled. In 2008, India was the world's sixth largest producer of marine and freshwater capture fisheries and the second largest aquaculture farmed fish producer. India exported 600,000 metric tonnes of fish products to nearly half of the world's countries. Though the available nutritional standard is 100% of the requirement, India lags far behind in terms of quality protein intake at 20% which is to be tackled by making available protein rich food products such as eggs, meat, fish, chicken etc. at affordable prices
India has shown a steady average nationwide annual increase in the mass-produced per hectare for some agricultural items, over the last 60 years. These gains have come mainly from India's green revolution, improving road and power generation infrastructure, knowledge of gains and reforms. Despite these recent accomplishments, agriculture has the potential for major productivity and total output gains, because crop yields in India are still just 30% to 60% of the best sustainable crop yields achievable in the farms of developed and other developing countries. Additionally, post harvest losses due to poor infrastructure and unorganised retail, caused India to experience some of the highest food losses in the world.
One of India's major agricultural products, rice, is suffering as a result of shifting monsoon patterns. States in the East of the country (Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and Odisha), have experienced high temperatures and insufficient rainfall in 2022, in contrast to Central and Southern India, which has experienced excessive rain in recent months, resulting in flooding in the Southern states of Kerala, Karnataka, and Madhya Pradesh.
The rice crop this season is therefore anticipated to decrease by roughly 6.77 million tonnes to 104.99 million, according to India's ministry of agriculture.
A study on India's food and land-use systems highlights the need for improved skills, stronger institutional linkages, and increased research investment to enhance sustainability and resilience in agriculture.
== History ==
Vedic literature provides some of the earliest written record of agriculture in India. Rigveda hymns, for example, describes ploughing, fallowing, irrigation, fruit and vegetable cultivation. Other historical evidence suggests rice and cotton were cultivated in the Indus Valley, and ploughing patterns from the Bronze Age have been excavated at Kalibangan in Rajasthan. Bhumivargaha, an Indian Sanskrit text, suggested to be 2500 years old, classifies agricultural land into 12 categories: urvara (fertile), ushara (barren), maru (desert), aprahata (fallow), shadvala (grassy), pankikala (muddy), jalaprayah (watery), kachchaha (contiguous to water), sharkara (full of pebbles and pieces of limestone), sharkaravati (sandy), nadimatruka (watered from a river), and devamatruka (rainfed). Some archaeologists believe that rice was a domesticated crop along the banks of the river Ganges in the sixth millennium BC. So were species of winter cereals (barley, oats, and wheat) and legumes (lentil and chickpea) grown in northwest India before the sixth millennium BC. Other crops cultivated in India 3000 to 6000 years ago, include sesame, linseed, safflower, mustard, castor, mung bean, black gram, horse gram, pigeon pea, field pea, grass pea (khesari), fenugreek, cotton, jujube, grapes, dates, jack fruit, mango, mulberry, and black plum. Indians may have domesticated river buffalo 5000 years ago.
According to some scientists agriculture was widespread in the Indian peninsula, 10000–3000 years ago, well beyond the fertile plains of the north. For example, one study reports 12 sites in the southern Indian states of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka providing clear evidence of agriculture of pulses Vigna radiata and Macrotyloma uniflorum, millet-grasses (Brachiaria ramosa and Setaria verticillata), wheats (Triticum dicoccum, Triticum durum/aestivum), barley (Hordeum vulgare), hyacinth bean (Lablab purpureus), sorghum (Sorghum bicolor), pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum), finger millet (Eleusine coracana), cotton (Gossypium sp.), linseed (Linum sp.), as well as gathered fruits of Ziziphus and two Cucurbitaceae.
Some claim Indian agriculture began by 9000 BC as a result of early cultivation of plants, and domestication of crops. Settled life soon followed with implements and techniques being developed for agriculture. Double monsoons led to two harvests being reaped in one year. Indian products soon reached trading networks and foreign crops were introduced. Plants and animals—considered esses "reeds that produce honey without bees" being grown. These were locally called साखर, (Sākhara). On their return journey soldiers carried the "honey bearing reeds", thus spreading sugar and sugarcane agriculture. People in India had invented, by about 500 BC, the process to produce sugar crystals. In the local language, these crystals were called khanda (खण्ड), which is the source of the word candy.
Before the 18th century, cultivation of sugarcane was largely confined to India. A few merchants began to trade in sugar – a luxury and an expensive spice in Europe until the 18th century. Sugar became widely popular in 18th-century Europe, then graduated to become a human necessity in the 19th century all over the world. Sugarcane plantations, just like cotton farms, became a major driver of large and forced human migrations in the 19th century and early 20th century – of people from Africa and from India, both in millions – influencing the ethnic mix, political conflicts and cultural evolution of Caribbean, South American, Indian Ocean and Pacific Island nations.
The history and past accomplishments of Indian agriculture thus influenced, in part, colonialism, slavery and slavery-like indentured labour practices in the new world, Caribbean wars and world history in 18th and 19th centuries.
=== Indian agriculture after independence ===
Despite some stagnation during the later modern era the independent Republic of India was able to develop a comprehensive agricultural programme.
In the years since its independence, India has made immense progress towards food security. Indian population has tripled, and food-grain production more than quadrupled. There has been a substantial increase in available food-grain per capita.
Before the mid-1960s, India relied on imports and food aid to meet domestic requirements. However, two years of severe drought in 1965 and 1966 convinced India to reform its agricultural policy and that it could not rely on foreign aid and imports for food security. India adopted significant policy reforms focused on the goal of food grain self-sufficiency. This ushered in India's Green Revolution. It began with the decision to adopt superior yielding, disease resistant wheat varieties in combination with better farming knowledge to improve productivity. The state of Punjab led India's green revolution and earned the distinction of being the country's breadbasket.
The initial increase in production was centred on the irrigated areas of the states of Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh. With the farmers and the government officials focusing on farm productivity and knowledge transfer, India's total food grain production soared. A hectare of Indian wheat farm that produced an average of 0.8 tonnes in 1948, produced 4.7 tonnes of wheat in 1975 from the same land. Such rapid growth in farm productivity enabled India to become self-sufficient by the 1970s. It also empowered the smallholder farmers to seek further means to increase food staples produced per hectare. By 2000, Indian farms were adopting wheat varieties capable of yielding 6 tonnes of wheat per hectare.
With agricultural policy success in wheat, India's Green Revolution technology spread to rice. However, since irrigation infrastructure was very poor, Indian farmers innovated with tube-wells, to harvest ground water. When gains from the new technology reached their limits in the states of initial adoption, the technology spread in the 1970s and 1980s to the states of eastern India — Bihar, Odisha and West Bengal. The lasting benefits of the improved seeds and new technology extended principally to the irrigated areas which account for about one-third of the harvested crop area. In the 1980s, Indian agriculture policy shifted to "evolution of a production pattern in line with the demand pattern" leading to a shift in emphasis to other agricultural commodities like oilseed, fruit and vegetables. Farmers began adopting improved methods and technologies in dairying, fisheries and livestock, and meeting the diversified food needs of a growing population.
As with rice, the lasting benefits of improved seeds and improved farming technologies now largely depends on whether India develops infrastructure such as irrigation network, flood control systems, reliable electricity production capacity, all-season rural and urban highways, cold storage to prevent spoilage, modern retail, and competitive buyers of produce from Indian farmers. This is increasingly the focus of Indian agriculture policy.
India ranks 74 out of 113 major countries in terms of food security index. India's agricultural economy is undergoing structural changes. Between 1970 and 2011, the GDP share of agriculture has fallen from 43% to 16%. This isn't because of reduced importance of agriculture or a consequence of agricultural policy; rather, it is largely due to the rapid economic growth in services, industrial output, and non-agricultural sectors in India between 2000 and 2010.
Agricultural scientist MS Swaminathan has played a vital role in the green revolution. In 2013, NDTV named him one of 25 living legends of India for outstanding contributions to agriculture and making India a food-sovereign country.
Two states, Sikkim and Kerala have planned to shift fully to organic farming by 2015 and 2016 respectively.
Rates of electricity usage for agricultural purposes have been discussed extensively over the years.
== Irrigation ==
Indian irrigation infrastructure includes a network of major and minor canals from rivers, groundwater well-based systems, tanks, and other rainwater harvesting projects for agricultural activities. Of these, the groundwater system is the largest. Of the 219.158 million hectares of cultivated land in India, about 66 million hectare can be irrigated by groundwater wells and an additional 58.5 million hectares by irrigation canals. In 2010, only about 35% of agricultural land in India was reliably irrigated. About 2/3rd cultivated land in India is dependent on monsoons. The improvements in irrigation infrastructure in the last 50 years have helped India improve food security, reduce dependence on monsoons, improve agricultural productivity and create rural job opportunities. Dams used for irrigation projects have helped provide drinking water to a growing rural population, control flood and prevent drought-related damage to agriculture. However, free electricity and attractive minimum support price for water intensive crops such as sugarcane and rice have encouraged ground water mining leading to groundwater depletion and poor water quality. A news report in 2019 states that more than 60% of the water available for farming in India is consumed by rice and sugar, two crops that occupy 24% of the cultivable area.
== Output ==
As of 2011, India had a large and diverse agricultural sector, accounting, on average, for about 16% of GDP and 10% of export earnings. India's arable land area of 159.7 million hectares (395 million acres) is the second largest in the world, after the United States. Its gross irrigated crop area of 82.6 million hectares (204 million acres) is the largest in the world. India is among the top three global producers of many crops, including wheat, rice, pulses, cotton, peanuts, fruits and vegetables. Worldwide, as of 2011, India had the largest herds of buffalo and cattle, is the largest producer of milk and has one of the largest and fastest growing poultry industries.
=== Major products and yields ===
The following table presents the 20 most important agricultural products in India, by economic value, in 2009. Included in the table is the average productivity of India's farms for each produce. For context and comparison, included is the average of the most productive farms in the world and name of country where the most productive farms existed in 2010. The table suggests India has large potential for further accomplishments from productivity increases, in increased agricultural output and agricultural incomes.
In 2019, as per Food and Agriculture Organization Corporate Statistical Database (FAOSTAT) data, India produces various agriculture products in following values:
In addition to growth in total output, agriculture in India has shown an increase in average agricultural output per hectare in last 60 years. The table below presents average farm productivity in India over three farming years for some crops. Improving road and power generation infrastructure, knowledge gains and reforms has allowed India to increase farm productivity between 40% and 500% over 40 years. India's recent accomplishments in crop yields while being impressive, are still just 30% to 60% of the best crop yields achievable in the farms of developed as well as other developing countries. Additionally, despite these gains in farm productivity, losses after harvest due to poor infrastructure and unorganised retail cause India to experience some of the highest food losses in the world.
=== World's largest producer ===
The Statistics Office of the Food and Agriculture Organization reported that, per final numbers for 2009, India had grown to become the world's largest producer of the following agricultural products:
Per final numbers for 2009, India is the world's second largest producer of the following agricultural products:
In 2009, India was the world's third largest producer of eggs, oranges, coconuts, tomatoes, peas and beans.
India and China are competing to establish the world record on rice yields. Yuan Longping of China National Hybrid Rice Research and Development Centre set a world record for rice yield in 2010 at 19 tonnes per hectare in a demonstration plot. In 2011, this record was surpassed by an Indian farmer, Sumant Kumar, with 22.4 tonnes per hectare in Bihar, also in a demonstration plot. These farmers claim to have employed newly developed rice breeds and system of rice intensification (SRI), a recent innovation in farming. The claimed Chinese and Indian yields have yet to be demonstrated on 7 hectare farm lots and that these are reproducible over two consecutive years on the same farm.
=== Horticulture ===
The total production and economic value of horticultural produce, such as fruits, vegetables and nuts has doubled in India over the 10-year period from 2002 to 2012. In 2012, the production from horticulture exceeded grain output for the first time. The total horticulture produce reached 277.4 million metric tonnes in 2013, making India the second largest producer of horticultural products after China. Of this, India in 2013 produced 81 million tonnes of fruits, 162 million tonnes of vegetables, 5.7 million tonnes of spices, 17 million tonnes of nuts and plantation products (cashew, cacao, coconut, etc.), 1 million tonnes of aromatic horticulture produce and 1.7 million tonnes of flowers (7.6 billion cut flowers).
During the 2013 fiscal year, India exported horticulture products worth ₹14,365 crore (US$1.5 billion), nearly double the value of its 2010 exports. Along with these farm-level gains, the losses between farm and consumer increased and are estimated to range between 51 and 82 million metric tonnes a year.
=== Organic agriculture ===
==== History ====
Organic agriculture is the practice of using ecologically based manures and compost to cultivate food. It prohibits the use of any synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, or genetically modified organisms. Organic farming was the norm in India for most of its history, but significant population growth in the mid-20th century forced farmers to find new ways to provide enough food to support the country. M. S. Swaminathan, an agricultural scientist, led an initiative known as the Green Revolution to integrate new technology into existing Indian agrarian practices to increase the farms' yields and general productivity. India began to adopt synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, and new irrigation technology to accomplish this goal. The revolution slowly decreased the frequency of organic farming.
==== Current status ====
Due to the Green Revolution, a large majority of farmland in India is not organic. Most Indian farmland is concentrated in large commercial farms that prioritise high yields and maximum economic gain. Organic farmland occupies around 2% of all farmland in India, which is most commonly divided into many small subsistence farms. Despite this, India still holds the ninth most organic farmland in the world.
There are several reasons why only a few large-scale organic farms exist in India. Organic farming requires more land, materials, and labour to achieve the same production levels as non-organic farms, so large-scale organic farming is highly inefficient. Organic agriculture is more expensive and time-consuming compared to conventional farming practices, which further explains the lack of large organic farms.
Organic agriculture has fed India for centuries and it is again a growing sector in India. Organic production offers clean and green production methods without the use of synthetic fertilisers and pesticides and it achieves a premium price in the market place. India has 650,000 organic producers, which is more than any other country. India also has 4 million hectares of land certified as organic wildculture, which is third in the world (after Finland and Zambia). As non-availability of edible biomass is impeding the growth of animal husbandry in India, organic production of protein-rich cattle, fish, and poultry feed using biogas/methane/natural gas by cultivating Methylococcus capsulatus bacteria with a tiny land and water footprint is a solution for ensuring adequate protein-rich food to the population.
== Agriculture-based cooperatives ==
India has seen a huge growth in cooperative societies, mainly in the farming sector, since 1947 when the country gained independence from Britain. The country has networks of cooperatives at the local, regional, state and national levels that assist in agricultural marketing. The commodities that are mostly handled are food grains, jute, cotton, sugar, milk, fruit and nuts Support by the state government led to more than 25,000 cooperatives being set up by the 1990s in the state of Maharashtra.
=== Sugar industry ===
Most of the sugar production in India takes place at mills owned by local cooperative societies. The members of the society include all farmers, small and large, supplying sugarcane to the mill. Over the last fifty years, the local sugar mills have played a crucial part in encouraging political participation and as a stepping stone for aspiring politicians. This is particularly true in the state of Maharashtra where a large number of politicians belonging to the Congress party or NCP had ties to sugar cooperatives from their local area and has created a symbiotic relationship between the sugar factories and local politics. However, the policy of "profits for the company but losses to be borne by the government", has made a number of these operations inefficient.
=== Marketing ===
As with sugar, cooperatives play a significant part in the overall marketing of fruit and vegetables in India. Since the 1980s, the amount of produce handled by Cooperative societies has increased exponentially. Common fruit and vegetables marketed by the societies include bananas, mangoes, grapes, onions and many others.
=== Dairy industry ===
Dairy farming based on the Amul Pattern, with a single marketing cooperative, is India's largest self-sustaining industry and its largest rural employment provider. Successful implementation of the Amul model has made India the world's largest milk producer. Here small, marginal farmers with a couple or so heads of milch cattle queue up twice daily to pour milk from their small containers into the village union collection points. The milk after processing at the district unions is then marketed by the state cooperative federation nationally under the Amul brand name, India's largest food brand. With the Anand pattern three-fourth of the price paid by the mainly urban consumers goes into the hands of millions of small dairy farmers, who are the owners of the brand and the cooperative.
=== Banking and rural credit ===
Cooperative banks play a great part in providing credit in rural parts of India. Just like the sugar cooperatives, these institutions serve as the power base for local politicians.
== Problems ==
"Slow agricultural growth is a concern for policymakers as some two-thirds of India's people depend on rural employment for a living. Current agricultural practices are neither economically nor environmentally sustainable and India's yields for many agricultural commodities are low. Poorly maintained irrigation systems and almost universal lack of good extension services are among the factors responsible. Farmers' access to markets is hampered by poor roads, rudimentary market infrastructure, and excessive regulation."
"With a population of just over 1.3 billion, India is the world's largest democracy. In the past decade, the country has witnessed accelerated economic growth, emerged as a global player with the world's fourth largest economy in purchasing power parity terms, and made progress towards achieving most of the Millennium Development Goals. India's integration into the global economy has been accompanied by impressive economic growth that has brought significant economic and social benefits to the country. Nevertheless, disparities in income and human development are on the rise. Preliminary estimates suggest that in 2009–10 the combined all India poverty rate was 32 % compared to 37 % in 2004–05. Going forward, it will be essential for India to build a productive, competitive, and diversified agricultural sector and facilitate rural, non-farm entrepreneurship and employment. Encouraging policies that promote competition in agricultural marketing will ensure that farmers receive better prices."
A 2003 analysis of India's agricultural growth from 1970 to 2001 by the Food and Agriculture Organization identified systemic problems in Indian agriculture. For food staples, the annual growth rate in production during the six-year segments 1970–76, 1976–82, 1982–88, 1988–1994, 1994–2000 were found to be respectively 2.5, 2.5, 3.0, 2.6, and 1.8% per annum. Corresponding analyses for the index of total agricultural production show a similar pattern, with the growth rate for 1994–2000 attaining only 1.5% per annum.
The biggest problem of farmers is the low price for their farm produce. A recent study showed that proper pricing based on energy of production and equating farming wages to Industrial wages may be beneficial for the farmers.
=== Infrastructure ===
India has very poor rural roads affecting timely supply of inputs and timely transfer of outputs from Indian farms. Irrigation systems are inadequate, leading to crop failures in some parts of the country because of lack of water. In other areas regional floods, poor seed quality and inefficient farming practices, lack of cold storage and harvest spoilage cause over 30% of farmer's produce going to waste, lack of organised retail and competing buyers thereby limiting Indian farmer's ability to sell the surplus and commercial crops.
The Indian farmer receives just 10% to 23% of the price the Indian consumer pays for exactly the same produce, the difference going to losses, inefficiencies and middlemen. Farmers in developed economies of Europe and the United States receive 64% to 81%.
=== Productivity ===
Although India has attained self-sufficiency in food staples, the productivity of its farms is below that of Brazil, the United States, France and other nations. Indian wheat farms, for example, produce about a third of the wheat per hectare per year compared to farms in France. Rice productivity in India was less than half that of China. Other staples productivity in India is similarly low. Indian total factor productivity growth remains below 2% per annum; in contrast, China's total factor productivity growths is about 6% per annum, even though China also has smallholding farmers. Several studies suggest India could eradicate its hunger and malnutrition and be a major source of food for the world by achieving productivity comparable with other countries.
By contrast, Indian farms in some regions post the best yields, for sugarcane, cassava and tea crops.
Crop yields vary significantly between Indian states. Some states produce two to three times more grain per hectare than others.
As the map shows, the traditional regions of high agricultural productivity in India are the north west (Punjab, Haryana and Western Uttar Pradesh), coastal districts on both coasts, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu. In recent years, the states of Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh in central India and Gujarat in the west have shown rapid agricultural growth.
The table compares the statewide average yields for a few major agricultural crops in India, for 2001–2002.
Crop yields for some farms in India are within 90% of the best achieved yields by farms in developed countries such as the United States and in European Union. No single state of India is best in every crop. Tamil Nadu achieved highest yields in rice and sugarcane, Haryana in wheat and coarse grains, Karnataka in cotton, Bihar in pulses, while other states do well in horticulture, aquaculture, flower and fruit plantations. These differences in agricultural productivity are a function of local infrastructure, soil quality, micro-climates, local resources, farmer knowledge and innovations.
The Indian food distribution system is highly inefficient. Movement of agricultural produce is heavily regulated, with inter-state and even inter-district restrictions on marketing and movement of agricultural goods.
One study suggests Indian agricultural policy should best focus on improving rural infrastructure primarily in the form of irrigation and flood control infrastructure, knowledge transfer of better yielding and more disease resistant seeds. Additionally, cold storage, hygienic food packaging and efficient modern retail to reduce waste can improve output and rural incomes.
The low productivity in India is a result of the following factors:
The average size of land holdings is very small (less than 2 hectares) and is subject to fragmentation due to land ceiling acts, and in some cases, family disputes. Such small holdings are often over-manned, resulting in disguised unemployment and low productivity of labour. Some reports claim smallholder farming may not be cause of poor productivity, since the productivity is higher in China and many developing economies even though China smallholder farmers constitute over 97% of its farming population. A Chinese smallholder farmer is able to rent his land to larger farmers, China's organised retail and extensive Chinese highways are able to provide the incentive and infrastructure necessary to its farmers for sharp increases in farm productivity.
Adoption of modern agricultural practices and use of technology is inadequate in comparison with Green Revolution methods and technologies, hampered by ignorance of such practices, high costs and impracticality in the case of small land holdings.
According to the World Bank, Indian branch's Priorities for Agriculture and Rural Development, India's large agricultural subsidies are hampering productivity-enhancing investment. This evaluation is based largely on a productivity agenda and does not take any ecological implications into account. According to a neo-liberal view, over-regulation of agriculture has increased costs, price risks and uncertainty because the government intervenes in labour, land, and credit markets. India has inadequate infrastructure and services. The World Bank also says that the allocation of water is inefficient, unsustainable and inequitable. The irrigation infrastructure is deteriorating. The overuse of water is being covered by over-pumping aquifers but, as these are falling by one foot of groundwater each year, this is a limited resource. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change released a report that food security may be a big problem in the region post 2030.
Illiteracy, general socio-economic backwardness, slow progress in implementing land reforms and inadequate or inefficient finance and marketing services for farm produce.
Inconsistent government policy. Agricultural subsidies and taxes are often changed without notice for short term political ends.
Irrigation facilities are inadequate, as revealed by the fact that only 52.6% of the land was irrigated in 2003–04, which result in farmers still being dependent on rainfall, specifically the monsoon season. A good monsoon results in a robust growth for the economy, while a poor monsoon leads to a sluggish growth. Farm credit is regulated by NABARD, which is the statutory apex agent for rural development in the subcontinent. At the same time, over-pumping made possible by subsidised electric power is leading to an alarming drop in aquifer levels.
A third of all food that is produced rots due to inefficient supply chains and the use of the "Walmart model" to improve efficiency is blocked by laws against foreign investment in the retail sector.
=== Farmer suicides ===
In 2012, the National Crime Records Bureau of India reported 13,754 farmer suicides. Farmer suicides account for 11.2% of all suicides in India. Activists and scholars have offered a number of conflicting reasons for farmer suicides, such as monsoon failure, high debt burdens, genetically modified crops, government policies, public mental health, personal issues and family problems.
According to an NCRB data, in 2022, India saw 11,290 suicides in the farming sector. This was a 3.75 per cent rise from the 10,881 suicides in 2021. In 2022, there were 5,207 farmers suicides compared to 5,318 in 2021. There were 6,083 suicides of farm labourers in 2022, as compared to 5,563 in 2021.
=== Marketing ===
Agromarketing is poorly developed in India.
=== Diversion of agricultural land for non-agricultural purpose ===
Indian National Policy for Farmers of 2007 stated that "prime farmland must be conserved for agriculture except under exceptional circumstances, provided that the agencies that are provided with agricultural land for non-agricultural projects should compensate for treatment and full development of equivalent degraded or wastelands elsewhere". The policy suggested that, as far as possible, land with low farming yields or that was not farmable should be earmarked for non-agricultural purposes such as construction, industrial parks and other commercial development.
Amartya Sen offered a counter viewpoint, stating that "prohibiting the use of agricultural land for commercial and industrial development is ultimately self-defeating". He stated that agricultural land may be better suited for non-agriculture purposes if industrial production could generate many times more than the value of the product produced by agriculture. Sen suggested India needed to bring productive industry everywhere, wherever there are advantages of production, market needs and the locational preferences of managers, engineers, technical experts as well as unskilled labour because of education, healthcare and other infrastructure. He stated that instead of government controlling land allocation based on soil characteristics, the market economy should determine productive allocation of land.
Please check the validity of the source listed above.
=== Climate change ===
== Initiatives ==
The required level of investment for the development of marketing, storage and cold storage infrastructure is estimated to be huge. The government has not been able to implement schemes to raise investment in marketing infrastructure. Among these schemes are 'Construction of Rural Godowns', 'Market Research and Information Network', and 'Development / Strengthening of Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure, Grading and Standardisation'.
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), established in 1905, was responsible for the search leading to the "Indian Green Revolution" of the 1970s. The ICAR is the apex body in agriculture and related allied fields, including research and education. The Union Minister of Agriculture is the president of the ICAR. The Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute develops new techniques for the design of agricultural experiments, analyses data in agriculture, and specialises in statistical techniques for animal and plant breeding.
Recently (May 2016) the government of India has set up the Farmers Commission to completely evaluate the agriculture programme. Its recommendations have had a mixed reception.
In November 2011, India announced major reforms in organised retail. These reforms would include logistics and retail of agricultural produce. The announcement led to major political controversy. The reforms were placed on hold by the government in December 2011.
In the summer of 2012, the subsidised electricity for pumping, which has caused an alarming drop in aquifer levels, put additional strain on the country's electrical grid due to a 19% drop in monsoon rains and may have contributed to a blackout across much of the country. In response the state of Bihar offered farmers over $100 million in subsidised diesel to operate their pumps.
In 2015, Narendra Modi announced to double farmer's income by 2022.
Startups with niche technology and new business models are working to solve problems in Indian agriculture and its marketing. Kandawale is one such e-commerce website which sells Indian red onions to bulk users direct from farmers, reducing unnecessary cost escalations.
In July 2025, the Government of India launched the Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana, a six-year initiative with an annual outlay of ₹24,000 crore, aimed at boosting crop yields and farmers' income in 100 low-performing districts.
Starting from the 2025–26 rabi season, the scheme will benefit around 1.7 crore farmers through convergence of 36 existing schemes across multiple ministries. It focuses on crop diversification, sustainable practices, irrigation, storage infrastructure, and improved access to credit.
District-level plans, monitored through 117 key indicators, will align with national goals of self-reliance, organic farming, and increased agricultural productivity. The initiative is a major step towards achieving Atmanirbhar Bharat in the agriculture sector.
=== Agriculture and the Indian economy ===
The contributions of agriculture in the Indian economy have been increasing over the years. According to the economic survey, the share of agriculture in gross domestic product (GDP) reached almost 20% for the first time in 17 years, making a sole bright spot in performance during financial year 2020–2021.
Modern farms and agriculture operations have changed over the years primarily because of advancements in technology, including sensors, devices, machines, and information technology.
Personalized e-commerce stores and market places have brought farming products like fertilizers, seeds, machines and equipment that help farmers grow quality products. Educational portals let farmers know innovative things about farming that increase the contributions of agriculture to the economy.
=== Organic farming ===
==== Historical initiatives ====
The Green Revolution's shift to new farming methods, such as irrigation and synthetic fertilizers, led to negative effects on the environment. The rise of commercial farms to support the Indian population, coupled with demands from other countries, resulted in mass deforestation. Excess water from irrigation systems collects toxic chemicals from pesticides, leading to runoff into streams that kills wildlife and pollutes freshwater sources. These and other effects have prompted concerns about the sustainability of non-organic farming, thereby raising awareness about the importance of adopting more sustainable organic farming practices.
One leader of this development was Sir Albert Howard. He was an English botanist who helped advance organic agricultural developments through numerous publications on sustainable organic farming methods in India. He raised awareness about the adverse effects of non-organic farming on the environment and helped educate the Indian population about the benefits of organic farming. His work and contributions to the field of organic agriculture led him to be known as the founder of the organic farming movement.
==== Recent initiatives ====
With the recent concerns about non-organic farming practices and their possibly adverse health effects, there has been a noticeable increase in demand for organic food in India. As more people notice the negative effects of non-organic farming on sustainability, it contributes to grow the organic farming movement. The Government of India is also playing an active role in promoting organic agriculture, as its various initiatives, like Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana and zero-budget natural farming, are making organic farming more accessible and sustainable. Most initiatives now focus on how organic agriculture can lead to improvements in the country's sustainability.
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) was launched in 2015 by the Narendra Modi regime to promote organic farming, under which farmers form organic farming clusters of 50 or more farmers with a minimum total area of 20 hectares (50 acres) to share organic methods using traditional sustainable methods, costs, and marketing, etc. It initially aimed to have 10,000 clusters by 2018 with at least 200,000 hectares (500,000 acres) under organic farming. It also aimed for the government to cover certification costs while promoting the use of traditional resources in organic farming. The government provides ₹49,000 per hectare (₹20,000 per acre) or US$701.8 per hectare (US$284.01 per acre) benefit over three years.
Other techniques of organic farming like zero budget natural farming (ZBNF) have been implemented by many small-scale farmers in Wayanad, Kerala. In this process they implement more natural and ecological methods of farming that decrease or completely cease use of pesticides and damaging chemicals. This alleviates damage caused by chemical overuse and mono cropping which is depleting the formerly fertile forest-land in the area.
One specific initiative is increasing the availability of organic farming in Tamil Nadu. The Government of Tamil Nadu has been publishing resources for farmers in the state to reduce their dependence on chemical fertilizers like Diammonium Phosphate and Urea. One specific resource outlines the creation of micro-compositing centers, also known as decentralized compositing centers. These are centers all around Tamil Nadu that turn people’s trash into compost and cleaning supplies.
An example of an existing center is Chennai Composting Center. This is a Micro Composting Center that repurposes one ton of trash and turns it into organic compost every day for large suppliers and farms around Chennai. By repurposing trash into compost to reduce fertilizer use in the area, Chennai Composting Center is creating a more sustainable agricultural community.
Along with progression with organic farming methods, new technologies in the form of moisture sensors and artificial intelligence are also being implemented in the Indian farming sector. Farmers are using moisture sensors to ensure that different crops have the exact amount of water that they need, which ensures that farmers can maximise crop yield. Along with this, artificial intelligence techniques are being implemented in food processing plants across India. AI provides more efficient ways to produce, harvest, and sell crops products as well as an emphasis on checking defective crops and improving the potential for healthy crop production. This further helps maximise crop yield as Rayda Ayed describes in her research on the effects of artificial intelligence in India.
==== Sustainability ====
Organic farming practices are currently having a positive effect on India's environment and will further improve the country's sustainability if continued. Specifically, it has a direct link to improving the economic sustainability of non-commercial farmers. Organic farmers can sell products on a small scale at a higher price than non-organic products. This enables them to increase their earnings on food sales and achieve greater economic sustainability. Further, organic farming is also creating more jobs in rural areas, as organic farms require more labour compared to non-organic ones.
This applies to two specific fertilizers used in India, Urea and Diammonium Phosphate (DAP). Urea is the most imported fertilizer in India, and it has many adverse health effects on those who use it. When these fertilizers come into contact with uncovered skin, they can cause irritation and, if left untreated, lead to skin damage. Diammonium Phosphate also causes similar effects when it comes into contact with uncovered skin and eyes. Skin irritation comes from these fertilizers releasing compounds such as ammonia and nitrogen oxides, which are harmful to both the human body and the soil they are applied to.
Regarding the environment, Urea, Diammonium Phosphate, and other fertilizers in India increase atmospheric nitrogen levels and strip soil of its nutrients. When these fertilizers are spread along farms, they react with water and release ammonia, which increases the amount of nitrogen in the air, and carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. This causes air and soil pollution, with adverse long-term effects. The continued use of these fertilizers is damaging India's environment.
In terms of environmental sustainability, organic farms do not use any artificial pesticides or fertilizers. This means that there is no toxic runoff or other environmentally damaging effects from organic farms. Avoiding these dangerous chemicals also leads to a healthier environment for farmers, as they do not have to deal with any threatening chemicals.
==== The future of organic agriculture ====
Organic farming has a combination of positive and negative outlooks in India. On the positive side, organic farming's high levels of sustainability offer it a promising future. Organic farms contribute to safer and healthier lives for both farmers and consumers due to their lack of dangerous chemicals, making the industry's projected outlook long-lasting and promising.
On the other hand, organic farms have some adverse effects. For example, organic farms have lower yields compared to non-organic farms. Compensating for this issue results in organic farmers cultivating more land to produce similar amounts of crops. This leads to deforestation, which is not sustainable. The ideal form of agriculture in India calls for a combination of both organic and non-organic farming techniques to maximise yields while promoting economic and environmental sustainability.
=== Government schemes ===
2020 Indian agriculture acts
Atal Bhujal Yojana
E-NAM for online agrimarketing
Gramin Bhandaran Yojana for local storage
Micro Irrigation Fund (MIF)
National Mission For Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA)
National Scheme on Fisheries Training and Extension
National Scheme on Welfare of Fishermen
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PMKSN) for minimum support scheme
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) for irrigation
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) for organic farming
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) for crop insurance
== Maps ==
== See also ==
== Bibliography ==
George A. Grierson (1885). Bihar Peasant Life. Bengal Secretariat Press, Calcutta.
== References ==
== Further reading ==
Agarwal, Ankit (2011), "Theory of Optimum Utilisation of Resources in agriculture during the Gupta Period", History Today 12, New Delhi, ISSN 2249-748X.
Akhilesh, K. B., and Kavitha Sooda. "A Study on Impact of Technology Intervention in the Field of Agriculture in India." in Smart Technologies (Springer, Singapore, 2020) pp. 373–385.
Bhagowalia, Priya, S. Kadiyala, and D. Headey. "Agriculture, income and nutrition linkages in India: Insights from a nationally representative survey." (2012). online
Bhan, Suraj, and U. K. Behera. "Conservation agriculture in India–Problems, prospects and policy issues." International Soil and Water Conservation Research 2.4 (2014): 1–12.
Bharti, N. (2018), "Evolution of agriculture finance in India: a historical perspective", Agricultural Finance Review, Vol. 78 No. 3, pp. 376–392. https://doi.org/10.1108/AFR-05-2017-0035
Brink, Lars. "Support to Agriculture in India in 1995-2013 and the Rules of the WTO." International Agricultural Trade Research Consortium (IATRC) Working Paper 14-01 (2014) online.
Brown, Trent. Farmers, Subalterns, and activists: social politics of sustainable agriculture in India (Cambridge University Press, 2018).
Chauhan, Bhagirath Singh, et al. "Global warming and its possible impact on agriculture in India." in Advances in agronomy (Academic Press, 2014) pp. 65–121.online
Chengappa, P. G. "Presidential Address: Secondary Agriculture: A Driver for Growth of Primary Agriculture in India." Indian Journal of Agricultural Economics 68.902-2016-66819 (2013): 1–19. online
Dev, S. Mahendra, Srijit Mishra, and Vijay Laxmi Pandey. "Agriculture in India: Performance, Challenges, and Opportunities." in A Concise Handbook of the Indian Economy in the 21st Century (Oxford University Press, 2014) pp. 321–350.
Goyal, S. & Prabha, & Rai, Dr & Singh, Shree Ram. Indian Agriculture and Farmers-Problems and Reforms. (2016)
Kekane Maruti Arjun. "Indian, Agriculture- Status, Importance and Role in Indian Economy," International Journal of Agriculture and Food Science Technology, ISSN 2249-3050, Volume 4, Number 4 (2013), pp. 343–346.
Kumar, Anjani, Krishna M. Singh, and Shradhajali Sinha. "Institutional credit to agriculture sector in India: Status, performance and determinants." Agricultural Economics Research Review 23.2 (2010): 253-264 online.
Manida, Mr M., and G. Nedumaran. "Agriculture In India: Information About Indian Agriculture & Its Importance." Aegaeum Journal, 8#3 (2020) online
Mathur, Archana S., Surajit Das, and Subhalakshmi Sircar. "Status of agriculture in India: trends and prospects." Economic and Political Weekly (2006): 5327-5336 online.
Nedumaran, Dr G. "E-Agriculture and Rural Development in India." (2020). online
Ramakumar, R. "Large-scale Investments in Agriculture in India." IDS Bulletin 43 (2012): 92–103. online
Ramakumar, R. "Agriculture and the Covid-19 Pandemic: An Analysis with Special Reference to India." Review of Agrarian Studies 10.2369-2020-1856 (2020) online.
Saradhi, Byra Pardha, et al. "Significant Trends in the Digital Transformation of Agriculture in India." International Journal of Grid and Distributed Computing 13.1 (2020): 2703-2709 [2].
Sharma, Shalendra D. (1999), Development and Democracy in India, Lynne Rienner Publishers, pp. 125–, ISBN 978-1-55587-810-8
State of Indian Agriculture 2011–12. New Delhi: Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, March 2012
== External links ==
Indian Agriculture. U.S. Library of Congress.
Indian Agriculture Data. Statistical information about Agriculture in India.
Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation website
Indian Council for Agricultural Research Home Page.
Principal crops of India and problems with Indian agriculture A collection of statistics (from India Statistical Report, 2011) along with sections of this Wikipedia article and YouTube videos.
Brighter Green Policy Paper: Veg or NonVeg, India at a Crossroads A December 2011 policy paper analysing the forces behind the rising consumption and production of meat, eggs, and dairy products in India, and the effects on India's people, environment, animals, and the global climate.
Mukherji, Biman (28 October 2013). "India's farmers start to mechanise amid a labour shortage, increasing productivity. - WSJ.com". Wall Street Journal. Online.wsj.com. Retrieved 30 October 2013.

Manure is organic matter that is used as organic fertilizer in agriculture. Most manure consists of animal feces; other sources include compost and green manure. Manures contribute to the fertility of soil by adding organic matter and nutrients, such as nitrogen, that are utilised by bacteria, fungi, and other organisms in the soil. Higher organisms then feed on the fungi and bacteria in a chain of life that comprises the soil food web.
== Types ==
There are in the 21st century three main classes of manures used in soil management, as laid out below. The term artificial manure, formerly in wide use, referred to artificial fertilizers; the latter term is the one usually used today for such manures.
=== Animal manure ===
Most animal manure consists of feces. Common forms of animal manure include farmyard manure (or farm slurry (liquid manure). Farmyard manure also contains plant material (often straw), which has been used as bedding for animals and has absorbed the feces and urine. Agricultural manure in liquid form, known as slurry, is produced by more intensive livestock rearing systems where concrete or slats are used instead of straw bedding. Manure from different animals has different qualities and requires different application rates when used as fertilizer. For example horses, cattle, pigs, sheep, chickens, turkeys, rabbits, and guano from seabirds and bats all have different properties. For instance, sheep manure is high in nitrogen and potash, while pig manure is relatively low in both. Horses mainly eat grass and a few weeds, so horse manure can contain grass and weed seeds, because horses do not digest seeds as cattle do. Cattle manure is a good source of nitrogen as well as organic carbon. Chicken litter, coming from a bird, is very concentrated in nitrogen and phosphate and is prized for both properties.
Animal manures may be adulterated or contaminated with other animal products, such as wool (shoddy and other hair), feathers, blood, and bone. Livestock feed can be mixed with the manure due to spillage. For example, chickens are often fed meat and bone meal, an animal product, which can end up becoming mixed with chicken litter.
=== Compost ===
Compost is the decomposed remnants of organic materials. It is usually of plant origin, but often includes some animal dung or bedding.
=== Green manure ===
Green manures are crops grown for the express purpose of plowing them in, thus increasing fertility through the incorporation of nutrients and organic matter into the soil. Leguminous plants such as clover are often used for this, as they fix nitrogen using Rhizobia bacteria in specialized nodes in the root structure.
Other types of plant matter used as manure include the contents of the rumens of slaughtered ruminants, spent grain (left over from brewing beer) and seaweed.
== Uses ==
=== Animal manure ===
Animal manure, such as chicken manure and cow dung, has been used for centuries as a fertilizer for farming. It can improve the soil structure (aggregation) so that the soil holds more nutrients and water, and therefore becomes more fertile. Animal manure also encourages soil microbial activity which promotes the soil's trace mineral supply, improving plant nutrition. It also contains some nitrogen and other nutrients that assist the growth of plants.
Odor is an obvious and major issue with animal manure. Components in swine manure include low molecular weight carboxylic acids, acetic, propionic, butyric, and valeric acids. Other components include skatole and trimethyl amine.
Animal manures with a particularly unpleasant odor (such as slurries from intensive pig farming) are usually knifed (injected) directly into the soil to reduce release of the odor. Manure from pigs and cattle is usually spread on fields using a manure spreader. Due to the relatively lower level of proteins in vegetable matter, herbivore manure has a milder smell than the dung of carnivores or omnivores. However, herbivore slurry that has undergone anaerobic fermentation may develop more unpleasant odors, and this can be a problem in some agricultural regions. Poultry droppings are harmful to plants when fresh, but after a period of composting are valuable fertilizers.
Manure is also commercially composted and bagged and sold as a soil amendment.
In 2018, Austrian scientists offered a method of paper production from elephant and cow manure.
Dry animal dung is used as a fuel in many countries around the world.
==== Issues ====
Any quantity of animal manure may be a source of pathogens or food spoilage organisms which may be carried by flies, rodents, or a range of other vector organisms and cause disease or put food safety at risk.
In intensive agricultural land use, animal manure is often not used as targeted as mineral fertilizers, and thus, the nitrogen utilization efficiency is poor. Animal manure can become a problem in terms of excessive use in areas of intensive agriculture with high numbers of livestock and too little available farmland.
Manure can emit the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide, contributing to climate change.
===== Livestock antibiotics =====
In 2007, a University of Minnesota study indicated that foods such as corn, lettuce, and potatoes have been found to accumulate antibiotics from soils spread with animal manure that contains these drugs.
Organic foods may be much more or much less likely to contain antibiotics, depending on their sources and treatment of manure. For instance, by Soil Association Standard 4.7.38, most organic arable farmers either have their own supply of manure (which would, therefore, not normally contain drug residues) or else rely on green manure crops for the extra fertility (if any nonorganic manure is used by organic farmers, then it usually has to be rotted or composted to degrade any residues of drugs and eliminate any pathogenic bacteria—Standard 4.7.38, Soil Association organic farming standards). On the other hand, as found in the University of Minnesota study, the non-usage of artificial fertilizers, and resulting exclusive use of manure as fertilizer, by organic farmers can result in significantly greater accumulations of antibiotics in organic foods.
== See also ==
== References ==
== External links ==
Application and environmental risks of livestock manure
North American Manure Expo
Cornell Manure Program
County-Level Estimates of Nitrogen and Phosphorus from Animal Manure for the Conterminous United States, 2002 United States Geological Survey
Manure Management, Water Quality Information Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture
Livestock and Poultry Environmental Learning Center, an eXtension community of practice about animal manure management
Antibiotics and Hormones in Animal Manure (Webcast): A two part webcast series about the science available on potential risks and best management practices related to antibiotics and hormones from animal manure

Crop rotation is the practice of growing a series of different types of crops in the same area across a sequence of growing seasons. This practice reduces the reliance of crops on one set of nutrients, pest and weed pressure, along with the probability of developing resistant pests and weeds.
Growing the same crop in the same place for many years in a row, known as monocropping, gradually depletes the soil of certain nutrients and promotes the proliferation of specialized pest and weed populations adapted to that crop system. Without balancing nutrient use and diversifying pest and weed communities, the productivity of monocultures is highly dependent on external inputs that may be harmful to the soil's fertility. Conversely, a well-designed crop rotation can reduce the need for synthetic fertilizers and herbicides by better using ecosystem services from a diverse set of crops. Additionally, crop rotations can improve soil structure and organic matter, which reduces erosion and increases farm system resilience.
== History ==
Farmers have long recognized that suitable rotations such as planting spring crops for livestock in place of grains for human consumption make it possible to restore or to maintain productive soils. Ancient Near Eastern farmers practiced crop rotation in 6000 BC, alternately planting legumes and cereals.
=== Two-field systems ===
Under a two-field rotation, half the land was planted in a year, while the other half lay fallow. Then, in the next year, the two fields were reversed. In China both the two- and three-field systems had been used since the Eastern Zhou period.
=== Three-field systems ===
From the 9th century to the 11th century, farmers in Europe transitioned from a two-field system to a three-field system. This system persisted until the 20th century. Available land was divided into three sections. The first section grew autumn planted crops such as rye and wheat. The second section grew spring planted crops such as oats; barley; and legumes: peas, lentils, or beans. The third section was left fallow. The three fields were rotated in this manner so that every three years, one of the fields would rest and lie fallow. Under the two-field system, only half the land was planted in any year. Under the new three-field rotation system, two thirds of the land was planted, potentially yielding a larger harvest. But the additional crops had a more significant effect than mere quantitative productivity. Since the spring crops were mostly legumes, which fix nitrogen needed for plants to make proteins, they increased the overall nutrition of the people of Europe.
=== Four-field rotations ===
The British agriculturist Charles Townshend (1674–1738) popularised this system in the 18th century. The sequence of four crops (wheat, turnips, barley and clover), included a fodder crop and a grazing crop, allowing livestock to be bred year-round. The four-field crop rotation became a key development in the British Agricultural Revolution.
=== Modern developments ===
In the Green Revolution of the mid-20th century, crop rotation gave way in the developed world to the practice of supplementing the chemical inputs to the soil through topdressing with fertilizers, adding (for example) ammonium nitrate or urea and restoring soil pH with lime. Such practices aimed to increase yields, to prepare soil for specialist crops, and to reduce waste and inefficiency by simplifying planting, harvesting, and irrigation.
== Crop choice ==
A preliminary assessment of crop interrelationships can be found in how each crop:
Contributes to soil organic matter (SOM) content.
Provides for pest management.
Manages deficient or excess nutrients.
Contributes to or controls for soil erosion.
Interbreeds with other crops to produce hybrid offspring.
Impacts surrounding food webs and field ecosystems.
Crop choice is often related to the goal the farmer is looking to achieve with the rotation, which could be weed management, increasing available nitrogen in the soil, controlling for erosion, or increasing soil structure and biomass, to name a few. When discussing crop rotations, crops are classified in different ways depending on what quality is being assessed: by family, by nutrient needs/benefits, and/or by profitability (i.e. cash crop versus cover crop). For example, giving adequate attention to plant family is essential to mitigating pests and pathogens. However, many farmers have success managing rotations by planning sequencing and cover crops around desirable cash crops. The following is a simplified classification based on crop quality and purpose.
=== Row crops ===
Many crops which are critical for the market, like vegetables, are row crops (that is, grown in tight rows). While often the most profitable for farmers, these crops are more taxing on the soil. Row crops typically have low biomass and shallow roots: this means the plant contributes low residue to the surrounding soil and has limited effects on structure. With much of the soil around the plant exposed to disruption by rainfall and traffic, fields with row crops experience faster break down of organic matter by microbes, leaving fewer nutrients for future plants.
In short, while these crops may be profitable for the farm, they are nutrient depleting. Crop rotation practices exist to strike a balance between short-term profitability and long-term productivity.
=== Legumes ===
A great advantage of crop rotation comes from the interrelationship of nitrogen-fixing crops with nitrogen-demanding crops. Legumes, like alfalfa and clover, collect available nitrogen from the atmosphere and store it in nodules on their root structure. When the plant is harvested, the biomass of uncollected roots breaks down, making the stored nitrogen available to future crops.
=== Grasses and cereals ===
Cereal and grasses are frequent cover crops because of the many advantages they supply to soil quality and structure. The dense and far-reaching root systems give ample structure to surrounding soil and provide significant biomass for soil organic matter.
Grasses and cereals are key in weed management as they compete with undesired plants for soil space and nutrients.
=== Green manure ===
Green manure is a crop that is mixed into the soil. Both nitrogen-fixing legumes and nutrient scavengers, like grasses, can be used as green manure. Green manure of legumes is an excellent source of nitrogen, especially for organic systems, however, legume biomass does not contribute to lasting soil organic matter like grasses do.
== Planning a rotation ==
There are numerous factors that must be taken into consideration when planning a crop rotation. Planning an effective rotation requires weighing fixed and fluctuating production circumstances: market, farm size, labor supply, climate, soil type, growing practices, etc. Moreover, a crop rotation must consider in what condition one crop will leave the soil for the succeeding crop and how one crop can be seeded with another crop. For example, a nitrogen-fixing crop, like a legume, should always precede a nitrogen depleting one; similarly, a low residue crop (i.e. a crop with low biomass) should be offset with a high biomass cover crop, like a mixture of grasses and legumes.
There is no limit to the number of crops that can be used in a rotation, or the amount of time a rotation takes to complete. Decisions about rotations are made years prior, seasons prior, or even at the last minute when an opportunity to increase profits or soil quality presents itself.
== Implementation ==
=== Relationship to other systems ===
Crop rotation systems may be enriched by other practices such as the addition of livestock and manure, and by growing more than one crop at a time in a field. A monoculture is a crop grown by itself in a field. A polyculture involves two or more crops growing in the same place at the same time. Crop rotations can be applied to both monocultures and polycultures, resulting in multiple ways of increasing agricultural biodiversity (table).
=== Incorporation of livestock ===
Introducing livestock makes the most efficient use of critical sod and cover crops; livestock (through manure) are able to distribute the nutrients in these crops throughout the soil rather than removing nutrients from the farm through the sale of hay.
Mixed farming or the practice of crop cultivation with the incorporation of livestock can help manage crops in a rotation and cycle nutrients. Crop residues provide animal feed, while the animals provide manure for replenishing crop nutrients and draft power. These processes promote internal nutrient cycling and minimize the need for synthetic fertilizers and large-scale machinery. As an additional benefit, the cattle, sheep and/or goat provide milk and can act as a cash crop in the times of economic hardship.
=== Polyculture ===
Polyculture systems, such as intercropping or companion planting, offer more diversity and complexity within the same season or rotation. An example is the Three Sisters, the inter-planting of corn with pole beans and vining squash or pumpkins. In this system, the beans provide nitrogen; the corn provides support for the beans and a "screen" against squash vine borer; the vining squash provides a weed suppressive canopy and a discouragement for corn-hungry raccoons.
Double-cropping is common where two crops, typically of different species, are grown sequentially in the same growing season, or where one crop (e.g. vegetable) is grown continuously with a cover crop (e.g. wheat). This is advantageous for small farms, which often cannot afford to leave cover crops to replenish the soil for extended periods of time, as larger farms can. When multiple cropping is implemented on small farms, these systems can maximize benefits of crop rotation on available land resources.
=== Organic farming ===
Crop rotation is a required practice, in the United States, for farms seeking organic certification. The “Crop Rotation Practice Standard” for the National Organic Program under the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, section §205.205, states that
Farmers are required to implement a crop rotation that maintains or builds soil organic matter, works to control pests, manages and conserves nutrients, and protects against erosion. Producers of perennial crops that aren’t rotated may utilize other practices, such as cover crops, to maintain soil health.
In addition to lowering the need for inputs (by controlling for pests and weeds and increasing available nutrients), crop rotation helps organic growers increase the amount of biodiversity their farms. Biodiversity is also a requirement of organic certification, however, there are no rules in place to regulate or reinforce this standard. Increasing the biodiversity of crops has beneficial effects on the surrounding ecosystem and can host a greater diversity of fauna, insects, and beneficial microorganisms in the soil as found by McDaniel et al 2014 and Lori et al 2017. Some studies point to increased nutrient availability from crop rotation under organic systems compared to conventional practices as organic practices are less likely to inhibit of beneficial microbes in soil organic matter.
While multiple cropping and intercropping benefit from many of the same principals as crop rotation, they do not satisfy the requirement under the NOP.
== Benefits ==
Agronomists describe the benefits to yield in rotated crops as "The Rotation Effect". The factors related to the increase are broadly due to alleviation of the negative factors of monoculture cropping systems. Specifically, improved nutrition; pest, pathogen, and weed stress reduction; and improved soil structure have been found in some cases to be correlated to beneficial rotation effects.
Other benefits include reduced production cost. Overall financial risks are more widely distributed over more diverse production of crops and/or livestock. Less reliance is placed on purchased inputs and over time crops can maintain production goals with fewer inputs. This in tandem with greater short and long term yields makes rotation a powerful tool for improving agricultural systems.
=== Soil organic matter ===
The use of different species in rotation allows for increased soil organic matter (SOM), greater soil structure, and improvement of the chemical and biological soil environment for crops. With more SOM, water infiltration and retention improves, providing increased drought tolerance and decreased erosion.
Soil organic matter is a mix of decaying material from biomass with active microorganisms. Crop rotation, by nature, increases exposure to biomass from sod, green manure, and various other plant debris. The reduced need for intensive tillage under crop rotation allows biomass aggregation to lead to greater nutrient retention and utilization, decreasing the need for added nutrients. With tillage, disruption and oxidation of soil creates a less conducive environment for diversity and proliferation of microorganisms in the soil. These microorganisms are what make nutrients available to plants. So, where "active" soil organic matter is a key to productive soil, soil with low microbial activity provides significantly fewer nutrients to plants; this is true even though the quantity of biomass left in the soil may be the same.
Soil microorganisms also decrease pathogen and pest activity through competition. In addition, plants produce root exudates and other chemicals which manipulate their soil environment as well as their weed environment. Thus rotation allows increased yields from nutrient availability but also alleviation of allelopathy and competitive weed environments.
=== Carbon sequestration ===
Crop rotations greatly increase soil organic carbon (SOC) content, the main constituent of soil organic matter. Carbon, along with hydrogen and oxygen, is a macronutrient for plants. Highly diverse rotations spanning long periods of time have shown to be even more effective in increasing SOC, while soil disturbances (e.g. from tillage) are responsible for exponential decline in SOC levels. In Brazil, conversion to no-till methods combined with intensive crop rotations has been shown an SOC sequestration rate of 0.41 tonnes per hectare per year.
In addition to enhancing crop productivity, sequestration of atmospheric carbon has great implications in reducing rates of climate change by removing carbon dioxide from the air.
=== Nitrogen fixing ===
Rotations can add nutrients to the soil. Legumes, plants of the family Fabaceae, have nodules on their roots which contain nitrogen-fixing bacteria called rhizobia. During a process called nodulation, the rhizobia bacteria use nutrients and water provided by the plant to convert atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia, which is then converted into an organic compound that the plant can use as its nitrogen source. It therefore makes good sense agriculturally to alternate them with cereals (family Poaceae) and other plants that require nitrates. How much nitrogen made available to the plants depends on factors such as the kind of legume, the effectiveness of rhizobia bacteria, soil conditions, and the availability of elements necessary for plant food.
=== Pathogen and pest control ===
Crop rotation helps to control pests and diseases that can become established in the soil over time. The changing of crops in a sequence decreases the population level of pests by (1) interrupting pest life cycles and (2) interrupting pest habitat. Plants within the same taxonomic family tend to have similar pests and pathogens. By regularly changing crops and keeping the soil occupied by cover crops instead of lying fallow, pest cycles can be broken or limited, especially cycles that benefit from overwintering in residue. This principle is used in organic farming, where pest control must be achieved without synthetic pesticides.
=== Weed management ===
Integrating certain crops, especially cover crops, into crop rotations is of particular value to weed management. These crops crowd out weeds through competition. In addition, the sod and compost from cover crops and green manure slows the growth of what weeds are still able to make it through the soil, giving the crops further competitive advantage. By slowing the growth and proliferation of weeds while cover crops are cultivated, farmers greatly reduce the presence of weeds for future crops, including shallow rooted and row crops, which are less resistant to weeds. Cover crops are, therefore, considered conservation crops because they protect otherwise fallow land from becoming overrun with weeds.
This system has advantages over other common practices for weeds management, such as tillage. Tillage is meant to inhibit growth of weeds by overturning the soil; however, this has a countering effect of exposing weed seeds that may have gotten buried and burying valuable crop seeds. Under crop rotation, the number of viable seeds in the soil is reduced through the reduction of the weed population.
In addition to their negative impact on crop quality and yield, weeds can slow down the harvesting process. Weeds make farmers less efficient when harvesting, because weeds like bindweeds, and knotgrass, can become tangled in the equipment, resulting in a stop-and-go type of harvest.
=== Reducing soil erosion ===
Crop rotation can significantly reduce the amount of soil lost from erosion by water. In areas that are highly susceptible to erosion, farm management practices such as zero and reduced tillage can be supplemented with specific crop rotation methods to reduce raindrop impact, sediment detachment, sediment transport, surface runoff, and soil loss.
Protection against soil loss is maximized with rotation methods that leave the greatest mass of crop stubble (plant residue left after harvest) on top of the soil. Stubble cover in contact with the soil minimizes erosion from water by reducing overland flow velocity, stream power, and thus the ability of the water to detach and transport sediment. Soil erosion and seal prevent the disruption and detachment of soil aggregates that cause macropores to block, infiltration to decline, and runoff to increase. This significantly improves the resilience of soils when subjected to periods of erosion and stress.
When a forage crop breaks down, binding products are formed that act like an adhesive on the soil, which makes particles stick together, and form aggregates. The formation of soil aggregates is important for erosion control, as they are better able to resist raindrop impact, and water erosion. Soil aggregates also reduce wind erosion, because they are larger particles, and are more resistant to abrasion through tillage practices.
The effect of crop rotation on erosion control varies by climate. In regions under relatively consistent climate conditions, where annual rainfall and temperature levels are assumed, rigid crop rotations can produce sufficient plant growth and soil cover. In regions where climate conditions are less predictable, and unexpected periods of rain and drought may occur, a more flexible approach for soil cover by crop rotation is necessary. An opportunity cropping system promotes adequate soil cover under these erratic climate conditions. In an opportunity cropping system, crops are grown when soil water is adequate and there is a reliable sowing window. This form of cropping system is likely to produce better soil cover than a rigid crop rotation because crops are only sown under optimal conditions, whereas rigid systems are not necessarily sown in the best conditions available.
Crop rotations also affect the timing and length of when a field is subject to fallow. This is very important because depending on a particular region's climate, a field could be the most vulnerable to erosion when it is under fallow. Efficient fallow management is an essential part of reducing erosion in a crop rotation system. Zero tillage is a fundamental management practice that promotes crop stubble retention under longer unplanned fallows when crops cannot be planted. Such management practices that succeed in retaining suitable soil cover in areas under fallow will ultimately reduce soil loss. In a recent study that lasted a decade, it was found that a common winter cover crop after potato harvest such as fall rye can reduce soil run-off by as much as 43%, and this is typically the most nutritional soil.
=== Biodiversity ===
Increasing the biodiversity of crops has beneficial effects on the surrounding ecosystem and can host a greater diversity of fauna, insects, and beneficial microorganisms in the soil as found by McDaniel et al 2014 and Lori et al 2017. Some studies point to increased nutrient availability from crop rotation under organic systems compared to conventional practices as organic practices are less likely to inhibit of beneficial microbes in soil organic matter, such as arbuscular mycorrhizae, which increase nutrient uptake in plants. Increasing biodiversity also increases the resilience of agro-ecological systems.
=== Farm productivity ===
Crop rotation contributes to increased yields through improved soil nutrition. By requiring planting and harvesting of different crops at different times, more land can be farmed with the same amount of machinery and labour.
=== Risk management ===
Different crops in the rotation can reduce the risks of adverse weather for the individual farmer.
== Challenges ==
While crop rotation requires a great deal of planning, crop choice must respond to a number of fixed conditions (soil type, topography, climate, and irrigation) in addition to conditions that may change dramatically from year to the next (weather, market, labor supply). In this way, it is unwise to plan crops years in advance. Improper implementation of a crop rotation plan may lead to imbalances in the soil nutrient composition or a buildup of pathogens affecting a critical crop. The consequences of faulty rotation may take years to become apparent even to experienced soil scientists and can take just as long to correct.
Many challenges exist within the practices associated with crop rotation. For example, green manure from legumes can lead to an invasion of snails or slugs and the decay from green manure can occasionally suppress the growth of other crops.
== See also ==
Agroecology
Carbon cycle
Convertible husbandry
Field system
Shifting cultivation
Tillage erosion
== References ==
== Further reading ==
== External links ==
Technology in the middle ages
"Rotation of Crops" . New International Encyclopedia. 1905.

Irrigation in agriculture is the practice of applying controlled amounts of water to land to help grow crops, landscape plants, and lawns. Irrigation has been a key aspect of agriculture for over 5,000 years and has been developed by many cultures worldwide. Irrigation helps to grow crops, maintain landscapes, and revegetate disturbed soils in dry areas and during times of below-average rainfall. In addition to these uses, irrigation is also employed to protect crops from frost, suppress weed growth in grain fields, and prevent soil consolidation. It is also used to cool livestock, reduce dust, dispose of sewage, and support mining operations. Drainage, which involves the removal of surface and sub-surface water from a given location, is often studied in conjunction with irrigation. Irrigation and drainage improvements are not necessarily mutually exclusive. Often both may be required together to assure sustained high-level production of crops. For a discussion of the role of drainage practices in agriculture .
Several irrigation methods differ in how water is supplied to plants. Surface irrigation, also known as gravity irrigation, is the oldest form of irrigation and has been in use for thousands of years. In sprinkler irrigation, water is piped to one or more central locations within the field and distributed by overhead high-pressure water devices. Micro-irrigation is a system that distributes water under low pressure through a piped network and applies it as a small discharge to each plant. Micro-irrigation uses less pressure and water flow than sprinkler irrigation. Drip irrigation delivers water directly to the root zone of plants. Subirrigation has been used in field crops in areas with high water tables for many years. It involves artificially raising the water table to moisten the soil below the root zone of plants.
Irrigation water can come from groundwater (extracted from springs or by using wells), from surface water (withdrawn from rivers, lakes or reservoirs) or from non-conventional sources like treated wastewater, desalinated water, drainage water, or fog collection. Irrigation can be supplementary to rainfall, which is common in many parts of the world as rainfed agriculture, or it can be full irrigation, where crops rarely rely on any contribution from rainfall. Full irrigation is less common and occurs only in arid landscapes with very low rainfall or when crops are grown in semi-arid areas outside the rainy season.
The environmental effects of irrigation relate to the changes in quantity and quality of soil and water as a result of irrigation and the subsequent effects on natural and social conditions in river basins and downstream of an irrigation scheme. The effects stem from altered hydrological conditions resulting from the installation and operation of the irrigation scheme. Amongst these problems is the depletion of underground aquifers through overdrafting. Soil can be over-irrigated due to poor distribution uniformity or management wastes water, chemicals, and may lead to water pollution. Over-irrigation can cause deep drainage from rising water tables, which can lead to irrigation salinity problems, requiring watertable control through some form of subsurface land drainage.
== Extent ==
The world’s total irrigated land area more than doubled between 1964 and 2023 and by 2023, 23% of all croplands were equipped for irrigation. In 2025, irrigated croplands produce 48% of all crops in value terms, indicating that irrigated land is 3.2 times more productive than rainfed land in value terms. On average, the yield of irrigated land is 76% higher than that of rain fed land.
The global land area equipped for irrigation reached 355 million ha in 2023, an increase of 23% from the 289 million ha of 2000 and more than twice the land area equipped for irrigation in the 1960s. The vast majority is located in Asia (71% in 2023), where irrigation was a key component of the green revolution; the Americas account for 16% and Europe for 8% of the world total. India (76 million ha) and China (75 million ha) have the largest equipped area for irrigation, far ahead of the United States of America (25 million ha). China and India also have the largest net gains in equipped area between 2000 and 2023 (+21 million ha for China and +15 million ha for India).
In 2000, the total fertile land was 2,788,000 km2 (689 million acres), and it was equipped with irrigation infrastructure worldwide. Roughly 68% of this area is in Asia, 17% in the Americas, 9% in Europe, 5% in Africa, and 1% in Oceania. The largest contiguous areas of high irrigation density are found in Northern and Eastern India and Pakistan along the Ganges and Indus rivers; in the Hai He, Huang He, and Yangtze basins in China; along the Nile river in Egypt and Sudan; and in the Mississippi-Missouri river basin, the Southern Great Plains, and in parts of California in the United States. Smaller irrigation areas are spread across almost all populated parts of the world.
By 2012, the area of irrigated land had increased to an estimated total of 3,242,917 km2 (801 million acres), which is nearly the size of India. The irrigation of 20% of farming land accounts for the production of 40% of food production.
=== Global overview ===
The scale of irrigation increased dramatically over the 20th century. In 1800, 8 million hectares globally were irrigated; in 1950, 94 million; and in 1990, 235 million. By 1990, 30% of the global food production came from irrigated land. Irrigation techniques across the globe include canals redirecting surface water, groundwater pumping, and diverting water from dams. National governments lead most irrigation schemes within their borders, but private investors and other nations, especially the United States, China, and European countries like the United Kingdom, also fund and organize some schemes within other nations.
By 2021, the global land area equipped for irrigation reached 352 million ha, an increase of 22% from the 289 million ha in 2000 and more than twice the land area equipped for irrigation in the 1960s. The vast majority is located in Asia (70%), where irrigation was a key component of the green revolution; the Americas account for 16%, and Europe for 8% of the world total. India (76 million ha) and China (75 million ha) have the largest irrigated area, far ahead of the United States of America (27 million ha). China and India also had the largest net gains in equipped area between 2000 and 2020 (+21 million ha in China and +15 million ha in India). All regions saw increases in irrigated area, with Africa growing the fastest (+29%), followed by Asia (+25%), Oceania (+24%), the Americas (+19%), and Europe (+2%).
Irrigation enables the production of more crops, especially commodity crops in areas that otherwise could not support them. Countries frequently invested in irrigation to increase wheat, rice, or cotton production, often with the overarching goal of increasing self-sufficiency.
=== Example values for crops ===
== Water sources ==
=== Groundwater and surface water ===
Irrigation water can come from groundwater (extracted from springs or by using wells), from surface water (withdrawn from rivers, lakes or reservoirs) or from non-conventional sources like treated wastewater, desalinated water, drainage water, or fog collection.
While floodwater harvesting is an accepted irrigation method, rainwater harvesting is usually not considered a form of irrigation. Rainwater harvesting is the collection of runoff water from roofs or unused land and its concentration.
=== Treated or untreated wastewater ===
=== Other sources ===
Irrigation water can also come from non-conventional sources like treated wastewater, desalinated water, drainage water, or fog collection.
In countries where humid air sweeps through at night, water can be obtained by condensation onto cold surfaces. This is practiced in the vineyards at Lanzarote using stones to condense water. Fog collectors are also made of canvas or foil sheets. Using condensate from air conditioning units as a water source is also becoming more popular in large urban areas.
As of November 2019, a Glasgow-based startup has helped a farmer in Scotland to establish edible salt marsh crops irrigated with seawater. An acre of previously marginal land has been put under cultivation to grow samphire, sea blite, and sea aster; these plants yield a higher profit than potatoes. The land is flood irrigated twice a day to simulate tidal flooding; the water is pumped from the sea using wind power. Additional benefits are soil remediation and carbon sequestration.
=== Competition for water resources ===
Until the 1960s, there were fewer than half as many people on the planet as there are in 2024. People were not as wealthy as today, consumed fewer calories and ate less meat, so less water was needed to produce their food. They required a third of the volume of water humans presently take from rivers. Today, the competition for water resources is much more intense, because there are now more than seven billion people on the planet, increasing the likelihood of overconsumption of food produced by water-thirsty animal agriculture and intensive farming practices. This creates increasing competition for water from industry, urbanisation, and biofuel crops. Farmers will have to strive to increase productivity to meet growing demands for food, while industry and cities find ways to use water more efficiently.
Successful agriculture depends on farmers having adequate access to water. However, water scarcity is already a critical constraint to farming in many parts of the world.
== Irrigation methods ==
There are several methods of irrigation. They vary in how the water is supplied to the plants. The goal is to apply the water to the plants as uniformly as possible, so that each plant has the amount of water it needs, neither too much nor too little. Irrigation can also be understood whether it is supplementary to rainfall, as happens in many parts of the world, or whether it is 'full irrigation, whereby crops rarely depend on any contribution from rainfall. Full irrigation is less common and occurs only in arid landscapes with very low rainfall or when crops are grown in semi-arid areas outside rainy seasons.
=== Surface irrigation ===
Surface irrigation, also known as gravity irrigation, is the oldest form of irrigation and has been in use for thousands of years. In surface (furrow, flood, or level basin) irrigation systems, water moves across the surface of agricultural lands to wet it and infiltrate into the soil. Water moves by following gravity or the slope of the land. Surface irrigation can be subdivided into furrow, border strip, or basin irrigation. It is often called flood irrigation when irrigation results in flooding or near-flooding of the cultivated land. Historically, surface irrigation has been the most common method for irrigating agricultural land in most parts of the world. The water application efficiency of surface irrigation is typically lower than that of other irrigation methods, due in part to limited control over applied depths. Surface irrigation involves significantly lower capital costs and energy requirements than pressurized irrigation systems. Hence, it is often the irrigation choice for developing nations, for low-value crops, and for large fields. Where water levels from the irrigation source permit, they are controlled by dikes (levees), usually plugged with soil. This is often seen in terraced rice fields (rice paddies), where the method is used to flood or control water levels in each distinct field. In some cases, the water is pumped or lifted by human or animal power to the level of the land.
Surface irrigation is even used to water urban gardens in certain areas, for example, in and around Phoenix, Arizona. The irrigated area is surrounded by a berm and the water is delivered according to a schedule set by a local irrigation district.
A special form of irrigation using surface water is spate irrigation, also called floodwater harvesting. In the event of a flood (spate), water is diverted into normally dry river beds (wadis) via a network of dams, gates, and channels and spread over large areas. The moisture stored in the soil will be used to grow crops thereafter. Spate irrigation areas are particularly located in semi-arid or arid mountainous regions.
=== Micro-irrigation ===
Micro-irrigation, sometimes called localized irrigation, low volume irrigation, or trickle irrigation, is a system where water is distributed under low pressure through a piped network, in a pre-determined pattern, and applied as a small discharge to each plant or adjacent to it. Traditional drip irrigation uses individual emitters, subsurface drip irrigation (SDI), micro-spray or micro-sprinklers, and mini-bubbler irrigation, all of which belong to this category of irrigation methods.
==== Drip irrigation ====
Drip irrigation, also known as microirrigation or trickle irrigation, functions as its name suggests. In this system, water is delivered at or near the root zone of plants, one drop at a time. This method can be the most water-efficient method of irrigation, if managed properly; evaporation and runoff are minimized. The field water efficiency of drip irrigation is typically in the range of 80 to 90% when managed correctly.
In modern agriculture, drip irrigation is often combined with plastic mulch, further reducing evaporation, and is also the means of delivery of fertilizer. The process is known as fertigation.
Deep percolation, where water moves below the root zone, can occur if a drip system is operated for too long or if the delivery rate is too high. Drip irrigation methods range from very high-tech and computerized to low-tech and labour-intensive. Lower water pressures are usually needed than for most other types of systems, except for low-energy center pivot systems and surface irrigation systems. The system can be designed for uniformity throughout a field or for precise water delivery to individual plants in a landscape containing a mix of plant species. Although it is difficult to regulate pressure on steep slopes, pressure-compensating emitters are available, so the field does not need to be level. High-tech solutions involve precisely calibrated emitters positioned along lines of tubing extending from a computerized set of valves.
=== Sprinkler irrigation ===
In sprinkler or overhead irrigation, water is piped to one or more central locations within the field and distributed by overhead high-pressure sprinklers or guns. A system using sprinklers, sprays, or guns mounted overhead on permanently installed risers is often referred to as a solid-set irrigation system. Higher-pressure sprinklers that rotate are called rotors and are driven by a ball drive, gear drive, or impact mechanism. Rotors can be designed to rotate in a full or partial circle. Guns are similar to rotors, except that they generally operate at very high pressures of 275 to 900 kPa (39.9 to 130.5 psi) and flows of 3 to 76 L/s (50 to 1200 US gal/min), usually with nozzle diameters in the range of 10 to 50 mm (0.39 to 1.97 in). Guns are used not only for irrigation, but also for industrial applications such as dust suppression and logging.
Sprinklers can also be mounted on moving platforms connected to the water source by a hose. Automatically moving wheeled systems known as traveling sprinklers may irrigate areas such as small farms, sports fields, parks, pastures, and cemeteries unattended. Most of these use a length of polyethylene tubing wound on a steel drum. As the tubing is wound onto the drum, powered by irrigation water or a small gas engine, the sprinkler is pulled across the field. When the sprinkler returns to the reel, the system shuts off. This type of system is known to most people as a "water reel" travelling irrigation sprinkler, and it is used extensively for dust suppression, irrigation, and the land application of wastewater.
Other travellers use a flat rubber hose dragged along behind them, while a cable pulls the sprinkler platform.
==== Center pivot ====
Center pivot irrigation is a form of sprinkler irrigation utilising several segments of pipe (usually galvanized steel or aluminium) joined and supported by trusses, mounted on wheeled towers with sprinklers positioned along its length. The system moves in a circular pattern and is fed with water from the pivot point at the center of the arc. These systems are found and used in all parts of the world and allow irrigation of all types of terrain. Newer systems have drop sprinkler heads.
As of 2017, most center pivot systems have drops hanging from a U-shaped pipe attached at the top of the pipe with sprinkler heads that are positioned a few feet (at most) above the crop, thus limiting evaporative losses. Drops can also be used with drag hoses or bubblers that deposit the water directly on the ground between crops. Crops are often planted in a circle to conform to the center pivot. This type of system is known as LEPA (Low Energy Precision Application). Originally, most center pivots were water-powered. These were replaced by hydraulic systems (T-L Irrigation) and electric-motor-driven systems (Reinke, Valley, Zimmatic). Many modern pivots feature GPS devices.
==== Irrigation by lateral move (side roll, wheel line, wheel move) ====
A series of pipes, each with a wheel of about 1.5 m diameter permanently affixed to its midpoint, and sprinklers along its length, is coupled together. Water is supplied at one end using a large hose. After sufficient irrigation has been applied to one strip of the field, the hose is removed, the water drained from the system, and the assembly rolled either by hand or with a purpose-built mechanism to move the sprinklers to a different position across the field. The hose is reconnected. The process is repeated in a pattern until the whole field has been irrigated.
This system is less expensive to install than a center pivot, but much more labor-intensive to operate – it does not travel automatically across the field: it applies water in a stationary strip, must be drained, and then rolled to a new strip. Most systems use 100 or 130 mm (3.9 or 5.1 in) diameter aluminum pipe. The pipe doubles as both a water transport and an axle for rotating all the wheels. A drive system (often located near the centre of the wheel line) rotates the clamped-together pipe sections as a single axle, thereby rolling the entire wheel line. Manual adjustment of individual wheel positions may be necessary if the system becomes misaligned.
Wheel line systems are limited in the amount of water they can carry and limited in the height of crops that can be irrigated. One useful feature of a lateral move system is that it consists of sections that can be easily disconnected, allowing it to adapt to the field shape as the line is moved. They are most often used for small, rectilinear, or oddly-shaped fields, hilly or mountainous regions, or in regions where labor is inexpensive.
=== Subirrigation ===
Subirrigation has been used for many years in field crops in areas with high water tables. It is a method of artificially raising the water table to allow the soil to be moistened from below the plants' root zone. Often, those systems are located on permanent grasslands in lowlands or river valleys and combined with drainage infrastructure. A system of pumping stations, canals, weirs, and gates allows it to raise or lower the water level in a network of ditches, thereby controlling the water table.
Subirrigation is also used in the commercial greenhouse production, usually for potted plants. Water is delivered from below, absorbed upwards, and the excess is collected for recycling. Typically, a solution of water and nutrients floods a container or flows through a trough for a short period (10–20 minutes) and is then pumped back into a holding tank for reuse. Sub-irrigation in greenhouses requires fairly sophisticated, expensive equipment and management. Advantages are water and nutrient conservation, and labor savings through reduced system maintenance and automation. It is similar in principle and action to subsurface basin irrigation.
Another type of subirrigation is the self-watering container, also known as a sub-irrigated planter. This consists of a planter suspended over a reservoir with a wicking material, such as a polyester rope. The water is drawn up the wick through capillary action. A similar technique is the wicking bed; this too uses capillary action.
== Efficiency ==
Modern irrigation methods are efficient enough to supply the entire field uniformly with water, ensuring each plant receives the amount it needs, neither too much nor too little. Water use efficiency in the field can be determined as follows:
Field Water Efficiency (%) = (Water Transpired by Crop ÷ Water Applied to Field) x 100
Increased irrigation efficiency has several positive outcomes for the farmer, the community, and the wider environment. Low application efficiency indicates that the amount of water applied to the field exceeds the crop or field requirements. Increasing the application efficiency means that the amount of crop produced per unit of water increases. Improved efficiency may be achieved by applying less water to an existing field or by using water more wisely, thereby achieving higher yields in the same area of land. In some parts of the world, farmers are charged for irrigation water; hence, over-application has a direct financial cost to the farmer. Irrigation often requires pumping energy (electricity or fossil fuels) to deliver water to the field or to supply the required operating pressure. Hence, increased efficiency will reduce both water and energy costs per unit of agricultural production. A reduction in water use on one field may allow the farmer to irrigate a larger area of land, increasing total agricultural production. Low efficiency usually means that excess water is lost through seepage or runoff, both of which can result in loss of crop nutrients or pesticides with potential adverse impacts on the surrounding environment.
Improving the efficiency of irrigation is usually achieved in one of two ways: either by improving the system design or by optimizing the irrigation management. Improving system design includes converting from one form of irrigation to another (e.g., from furrow to drip irrigation) and making small changes to the current system (e.g., adjusting flow rates and operating pressures). Irrigation management refers to the scheduling of irrigation events and decisions about how much water to apply.
== Garden irrigation ==
Domestic gardens and landscaped areas around public buildings are often equipped with some form of irrigation in dry climates.
In Australia, small garden sprinklers attached to a hose became a common form of irrigation, often regulated by a timer. In the 1960s, Hugall & Hoile, a small company in Perth, Western Australia, invented a system which they called "reticulation", by which a garden's irrigation system was divided into segments, with solenoids (electronic valves) connected to a mechanical timer. The system became highly popular, and within 20 years, around half of all homes in Perth had automated sprinkler systems. Robert Hugall made a name for himself as "the father of backyard irrigation", while former Australian cricketer Wally Edwards (who founded Holman Industries in 1966) later targeted the DIY market in garden watering systems in the early 1990s; both men grew rich from their companies.
As climate change is causing hotter, drier weather on both sides of the continent, newer drip irrigation systems that use less water have been developed. In addition, desalination plants have been built or recommissioned in Perth, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, and Brisbane, to meet the growing need for more water to keep plants and, especially, the tree canopy, growing. Adopting xeriscaping principles can minimize the need for irrigation.
== Challenges ==
=== Environmental impacts ===
Negative impacts frequently accompany extensive irrigation. Some projects that diverted surface water for irrigation dried up the water sources, which led to a more extreme regional climate. Projects that relied on groundwater and pumped too much from underground aquifers created subsidence and salinization. Salinization of irrigation water, in turn, damaged the crops and seeped into drinking water. Pests and pathogens also thrived in the irrigation canals or ponds full of still water, which created regional outbreaks of diseases like malaria and schistosomiasis. Governments also used irrigation schemes to encourage migration, especially of more desirable populations into an area. Additionally, some of these large nationwide schemes failed to pay off at all, costing more than any benefit gained from increased crop yields.
Overdrafting (depletion) of underground aquifers: In the mid-20th century, the advent of diesel and electric motors led to systems that could pump groundwater out of major aquifers faster than drainage basins could refill them. This can lead to permanent loss of aquifer capacity, decreased water quality, ground subsidence, and other problems. The future of food production in such areas as the North China Plain, the Punjab region in India and Pakistan, and the Great Plains of the US is threatened by this phenomenon.
=== Technical challenges ===
Irrigation schemes involve addressing numerous engineering and economic challenges while minimizing adverse environmental impacts. Such problems include:
Ground subsidence (e.g. New Orleans, Louisiana)
Underirrigation or irrigation giving only just enough water for the plant (e.g., in drip line irrigation) gives poor soil salinity control, which leads to increased soil salinity with consequent buildup of toxic salts on the soil surface in areas with high evaporation. This requires either leaching to remove these salts and a method of drainage to carry the salts away. When using drip lines, leaching is best done at regular intervals (with only a slight excess of water) so that the salt is flushed back under the plant's roots.
Overirrigation because of poor distribution uniformity or management wastes water, chemicals, and may lead to water pollution.
Deep drainage (from over-irrigation) may result in rising water tables, which in some instances will lead to problems of irrigation salinity requiring watertable control by some form of subsurface land drainage. For example, in Australia, over-abstraction of fresh water for intensive irrigation activities has caused 33% of the land area to be at risk of salination.
Drainage front instability, also known as viscous fingering, where an unstable drainage front results in a pattern of fingers and viscous entrapped saturated zones.
Irrigation with saline or high-sodium water may damage soil structure owing to the formation of alkaline soil.
Clogging of filters: algae can clog filters, drip installations, and nozzles. Chlorination, algaecide, UV, and ultrasonic methods can be used for algae control in irrigation systems.
Complications in accurately measuring irrigation performance, which changes over time and space, using measures such as productivity, efficiency, equity, and adequacy.
Macro-irrigation, typical in intensive agriculture, where also are used agrochemicals, often causes eutrophication.
=== Social aspects ===
Competition for surface water rights
Assisting smallholders in sustainably and collectively managing irrigation technology and changes in technology.
== History ==
=== Ancient history ===
Archaeological investigations have found evidence of irrigation in areas lacking sufficient natural rainfall to support rainfed agriculture. Some of the earliest known use of the technology dates to the 6th millennium BCE in Khuzistan in the south-west of Iran. The site of Choga Mami, in present-day Iraq on the border with Iran, is believed to be the earliest to show the first canal irrigation in operation at about 6000 BCE.
Irrigation was used to manipulate water in the alluvial plains of the Indus Valley Civilization, with its application estimated to have begun around 4500 BCE and to have drastically increased the size and prosperity of their agricultural settlements. The Indus Valley Civilization developed sophisticated irrigation and water-storage systems, including artificial reservoirs at Girnar dated to 3000 BCE, and an early canal irrigation system from c. 2600 BCE. Large-scale agriculture was practiced, with an extensive network of canals used for irrigation.
Farmers in the Mesopotamian plain used irrigation from at least the third millennium BCE.
They developed perennial irrigation, regularly watering crops throughout the growing season by coaxing water through a matrix of small channels formed in the field.
Ancient Egyptians practiced basin irrigation using the flooding of the Nile to inundate land plots which had been surrounded by dikes. The flood water remained until the fertile sediment had settled before the engineers returned the surplus to the watercourse. There is evidence of the ancient Egyptian pharaoh Amenemhet III in the twelfth dynasty (about 1800 BCE) using the natural lake of the Faiyum Oasis as a reservoir to store surpluses of water for use during dry seasons. The lake swelled annually from the flooding of the Nile.
The Ancient Nubians developed a form of irrigation by using a waterwheel-like device called a sakia. Irrigation began in Nubia between the third and second millennia BCE. It largely depended upon the flood waters that would flow through the Nile River and other rivers in what is now the Sudan.
In sub-Saharan Africa, irrigation reached the Niger River region cultures and civilizations by the first or second millennium BCE and was based on wet-season flooding and water harvesting.
Evidence of terrace irrigation occurs in pre-Columbian America, early Syria, India, and China. In the Zana Valley of the Andes Mountains in Peru, archaeologists have found remains of three irrigation canals radiocarbon-dated from the 4th millennium BCE, the 3rd millennium BCE and the 9th century CE. These canals provide the earliest record of irrigation in the New World. Traces of a canal possibly dating from the 5th millennium BCE were found under the 4th-millennium canal.
Ancient Persia (modern-day Iran) used irrigation as early as the 6th millennium BCE to grow barley in areas with insufficient rainfall. The Qanats, developed in ancient Persia about 800 BCE, are among the oldest known irrigation methods still in use today. They are now found in Asia, the Middle East, and North Africa. The system comprises a network of vertical wells and gently sloping tunnels driven into the sides of cliffs and steep hills to tap groundwater. The noria, a water wheel with clay pots around the rim powered by the flow of the stream (or by animals where the water source was still), first came into use at about this time among Roman settlers in North Africa. By 150 BCE, the pots were fitted with valves to allow smoother filling as they were forced underwater.
==== Sri Lanka ====
The irrigation works of ancient Sri Lanka, the earliest dating from about 300 BCE in the reign of King Pandukabhaya, and under continuous development for the next thousand years, were one of the most complex irrigation systems of the ancient world. They included underground canals and artificial reservoirs to store water. These reservoirs and canal systems were used primarily to irrigate paddy fields, which require a lot of water to cultivate. Most of these irrigation systems still exist undamaged to this day in Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa, thanks to their advanced and precise engineering. The system was extensively restored and further extended during the reign of King Parakrama Bahu (1153–1186 CE).
==== China ====
The oldest known hydraulic engineers of China were Sunshu Ao (6th century BCE) of the Spring and Autumn period and Ximen Bao (5th century BCE) of the Warring States period, both of whom worked on large irrigation projects. In the Sichuan region belonging to the state of Qin of ancient China, the Dujiangyan Irrigation System devised by the Qin Chinese hydrologist and irrigation engineer Li Bing was built in 256 BCE to irrigate a vast area of farmland that today still supplies water. By the 2nd century CE, during the Han dynasty, the Chinese also used chain pumps which lifted water from a lower elevation to a higher one. These were powered by manual foot-pedal, hydraulic waterwheels, or rotating mechanical wheels pulled by oxen. The water was used for public works, providing water for urban residential quarters and palace gardens, but mostly for irrigation of farmland canals and channels in the fields.
==== Korea ====
Korea, Chang Yŏngsil, also known as Jang Yeong-sil, a Korean engineer of the Joseon dynasty, under the active direction of the king, Sejong the Great, invented the world's first rain gauge, uryanggye (Korean: 우량계) in 1441. It was installed in irrigation tanks as part of a nationwide system to measure and collect rainfall for agricultural applications. Planners and farmers could better use the information gathered in the survey with this instrument.
==== North America ====
The earliest agricultural irrigation canal system known in the area of the present-day United States dates to between 1200 BCE and 800 BCE and was discovered by Desert Archaeology, Inc. in Marana, Arizona (adjacent to Tucson) in 2009. The irrigation-canal system predates the Hohokam culture by two thousand years and belongs to an unidentified culture. In North America, the Hohokam were the only culture known to rely on irrigation canals to water their crops, and their irrigation systems supported the largest population in the Southwest by CE 1300. The Hohokam constructed simple canals, combined with weirs, for their agricultural pursuits. Between the 7th and 14th centuries, they built and maintained extensive irrigation networks along the lower Salt and middle Gila Rivers that rivaled the complexity of those used in the ancient Near East, Egypt, and China. These were constructed using relatively simple excavation tools, without the benefit of advanced engineering technologies, and achieved drops of a few feet per mile, balancing erosion and siltation. The Hohokam cultivated cotton, tobacco, maize, beans, and squash varieties and harvested an assortment of wild plants. Late in the Hohokam Chronological Sequence, they used extensive dry-farming systems, primarily to grow agave for food and fiber. Their reliance on agricultural strategies based on canal irrigation, vital in their less-than-hospitable desert environment and arid climate, provided the basis for the aggregation of rural populations into stable urban centers.
==== South America ====
The oldest known irrigation canals in the Americas are in the desert of northern Peru in the Zaña Valley near the hamlet of Nanchoc. The canals have been radiocarbon dated to at least 3400 BCE and possibly as old as 4700 BCE. The canals at that time irrigated crops such as peanuts, squash, manioc, chenopods, a relative of Quinoa, and later maize.
=== Modern history ===
The scale of global irrigation increased dramatically over the 20th century. In 1800, 8 million hectares were irrigated; in 1950, 94 million hectares, and in 1990, 235 million hectares. By 1990, 30% of the global food production came from irrigated land. Irrigation techniques across the globe include canals redirecting surface water, groundwater pumping, and diverting water from dams. National governments led most irrigation schemes within their borders, but private investors and other nations, especially the United States, China, and European countries like the United Kingdom, funded and organized some schemes within other nations. Irrigation enabled the production of more crops, especially commodity crops in areas that otherwise could not support them. Countries frequently invested in irrigation to increase wheat, rice, or cotton production, often with the overarching goal of increasing self-sufficiency. In the 20th century, global anxiety, specifically about the American cotton monopoly, fueled many empirical irrigation projects: Britain began developing irrigation in India, the Ottomans in Egypt, the French in Algeria, the Portuguese in Angola, the Germans in Togo, and Soviets in Central Asia.
Negative impacts frequently accompany extensive irrigation. Some projects that diverted surface water for irrigation dried up water sources, leading to a more extreme regional climate. Projects that relied on groundwater and pumped too much from underground aquifers created subsidence and salinization. Salinization of irrigation water damaged the crops and seeped into drinking water. Pests and pathogens also thrived in the irrigation canals or ponds full of still water, which created regional outbreaks of diseases like malaria and schistosomiasis. Governments also used irrigation schemes to encourage migration, especially of more desirable populations into an area. Additionally, some of these large nationwide schemes failed to pay off at all, costing more than any benefit gained from increased crop yields.
==== American West ====
Irrigated land in the United States increased from 300,000 acres in 1880 to 4.1 million in 1890 to 7.3 million in 1900. Two thirds of this irrigation sources from groundwater or small ponds and reservoirs, while the other one third comes from large dams. One of the main attractions of irrigation in the West was its increased dependability compared to rainfall-watered agriculture in the East. Proponents argued that farmers with a dependable water supply could more easily get loans from bankers interested in this more predictable farming model. Most irrigation in the Great Plains region derived from underground aquifers. Euro-American farmers who colonized the region in the 19th century tried to grow the commodity crops they were used to, such as wheat, corn, and alfalfa, but rainfall limited their yields. Between the late 1800s and the 1930s, farmers used wind-powered pumps to draw groundwater. These windpumps had limited power, but the development of gas-powered pumps in the mid-1930s pushed wells deep into the Ogallala Aquifer. Farmers irrigated fields by laying pipes across the field with sprinklers at intervals, a labor-intensive process, until the advent of the center-pivot sprinkler after World War II, which made irrigation significantly easier. By the 1970s, farmers drained the aquifer ten times faster than it could recharge, and by 1993, they had removed half of the accessible water.
Large-scale federal funding and intervention pushed through the majority of irrigation projects in the West, especially in California, Colorado, Arizona, and Nevada. At first, plans to increase irrigated farmland, largely by giving land to farmers and asking them to find water, failed across the board. Congress passed the Desert Land Act in 1877 and the Carey Act in 1894, which only marginally increased irrigation. Only in 1902 did Congress pass the National Reclamation Act, which channeled money from the sale of western public lands, in parcels up to 160 acres large, into irrigation projects on public or private land in the arid West. The Congressmen who passed the law and their wealthy supporters supported Western irrigation because it would increase American exports, 'reclaim' the West, and push the Eastern poor out West for a better life.
While the National Reclamation Act was the most successful piece of federal irrigation legislation, its implementation did not go as planned. The Reclamation Service chose to push most of the Act's money toward construction rather than settlement, so the Service overwhelmingly prioritized building large dams like the Hoover Dam. Over the 20th century, Congress and state governments grew more frustrated with the Reclamation Service and the irrigation schemes. Frederick Newell, head of the Reclamation Service, proving uncompromising and challenging to work with, falling crop prices, resistance to delay debt payments, and refusal to begin new projects until the completion of old ones all contributed. The Reclamation Extension Act of 1914, transferring a significant amount of irrigation decision-making power regarding irrigation projects from the Reclamation Service to Congress, was in many ways a result of increasing political unpopularity of the Reclamation Service.
In the lower Colorado Basin of Arizona, Colorado, and Nevada, the states derive irrigation water largely from rivers, especially the Colorado River, which irrigates more than 4.5 million acres of land, with a less significant amount coming from groundwater. In the 1952 case Arizona v. California, Arizona sued California for increased access to the Colorado River, under the grounds that their groundwater supply could not sustain their almost entirely irrigation-based agricultural economy, which they won. California, which began irrigating in earnest in the 1870s in San Joaquin Valley, had passed the Wright Act of 1887 permitting agricultural communities to construct and operate needed irrigation works. The Colorado River also irrigates large fields in California's Imperial Valley, fed by the National Reclamation Act-built All-American Canal.
==== Soviet Central Asia ====
When the Bolsheviks conquered Central Asia in 1917, the native Kazakhs, Uzbeks, and Turkmens used minimal irrigation. The Slavic immigrants pushed into the area by the Tsarist government brought their irrigation methods, including waterwheels, the use of rice paddies to restore salted land, and underground irrigation channels. Russians dismissed these techniques as crude and inefficient. Despite this, tsarist officials maintained these systems through the late 19th century without other solutions.
Before conquering the area, the Russian government accepted a 1911 American proposal to send hydraulic experts to Central Asia to investigate the potential for large-scale irrigation. A 1918 decree by Lenin then encouraged irrigation development in the region, which began in the 1930s. When it did, Stalin and other Soviet leaders prioritized large-scale, ambitious hydraulic projects, especially along the Volga River. The Soviet irrigation push stemmed mainly from their late 19th century fears of the American cotton monopoly and subsequent desire to achieve cotton self-sufficiency. They had built up their textile manufacturing industry in the 19th century, requiring increased cotton and irrigation, as the region did not receive enough rainfall to support cotton farming.
The Russians built dams on the Don and Kuban Rivers for irrigation, removing freshwater flow from the Sea of Azov and making it much saltier. Depletion and salinization scourged other areas of the Russian irrigation project. In the 1950s, Soviet officials began also diverting the Syr Darya and the Amu Darya, which fed the Aral Sea. Before diversion, the rivers delivered 55 cubic kilometres (13 cu mi) of water to the Aral Sea per year, but after diversion, they delivered only 6 cubic kilometres (1.4 cu mi). Because of its reduced inflow, the Aral Sea covered less than half of its original seabed, which made the regional climate more extreme and created airborne salinization, lowering nearby crop yields.
By 1975, the USSR used eight times as much water as it had in 1913, mostly for irrigation. Russia's expansion of irrigation began to decline in the late 1980s, and irrigated hectares in Central Asia peaked at 7 million. Mikhail Gorbachev killed a proposed plan to reverse the Ob and Yenisei for irrigation in 1986, and the breakup of the USSR in 1991 ended Russian investment in Central Asian cotton irrigation.
==== Africa ====
Various irrigation schemes with different goals and success rates were implemented across Africa in the 20th century, but were all influenced by colonial forces. The Tana River Irrigation Scheme in eastern Kenya, completed between 1948 and 1963, opened up new lands for agriculture. The Kenyan government attempted to resettle the area with detainees from the Mau Mau uprising. Italian oil drillers discovered Libya's underground water resources during the Italian colonization of Libya. This water lay dormant until 1969, when Muammar al-Gaddafi and American Armand Hammer built the Great Man-Made River to deliver the Saharan water to the coast. The water largely contributed to irrigation but cost four to ten times more than the crops it produced were worth.
In 1912, the Union of South Africa established an irrigation department and began investing in water storage infrastructure and irrigation systems. The government used irrigation and dam-building to further social goals such as poverty relief by creating construction jobs for poor whites and by developing irrigation schemes to increase white farming. One of their first significant irrigation projects was the Hartbeespoort Dam, begun in 1916 to elevate the living conditions of the 'poor whites' in the region and eventually completed as a 'whites only' employment opportunity. The Pretoria irrigation scheme, Kammanassie project, and Buchuberg irrigation scheme on the Orange River all followed in the same vein in the 1920s and 30s.
In Egypt, modern irrigation began with Muhammad Ali Pasha in the mid-1800s, who sought to achieve Egyptian independence from the Ottomans through increased trade with Europe—specifically cotton exportation. His administration proposed replacing the traditional Nile basin irrigation, which took advantage of the annual ebb and flow of the Nile, with irrigation barrages in the lower Nile, which better suited cotton production. Egypt devoted 105,000 ha to cotton in 1861, a figure that increased fivefold by 1865. Most of their exports were shipped to England, and the United States Civil War-induced cotton scarcity in the 1860s cemented Egypt as England's cotton producer. As the Egyptian economy became more dependent on cotton in the 20th century, controlling even small Nile floods became more important. Cotton production was more at risk of destruction than more common crops like barley or wheat. After the British occupation of Egypt in 1882, the British intensified the conversion to perennial irrigation with the construction of the Delta Barrage, the Assiut Barrage, and the first Aswan Dam. Perennial irrigation decreased local control over water and made traditional subsistence farming or the farming of other crops incredibly difficult, eventually contributing to widespread peasant bankruptcy and the 1879-1882 'Urabi revolt.
== Examples by country ==
See the below template: (Link to a similar template for mobile users.)
== Gallery ==
== See also ==
Deficit irrigation
Gezira Scheme
Irrigation management
Irrigation statistics
Leaf Sensor
Lift irrigation scheme
List of countries by irrigated land area
Surface irrigation
Tidal irrigation
Water use in alluvial fans
All pages with titles containing irrigation
== Footnotes ==
== Sources ==
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY 4.0 (license statement/permission). Text taken from The State of the World’s Land and Water Resources for Food and Agriculture 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
== References ==
=== Sources ===
== Sources ==
== External links ==
International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage (ICID)
Irrigation at the Water Quality Information Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture
AQUASTAT: FAO's global information system on water and agriculture

Cotton (from Arabic qutn) is a soft, fluffy staple fiber that grows in a boll, or protective case, around the seeds of the cotton plants of the genus Gossypium in the mallow family Malvaceae. The fiber is almost pure cellulose and may contain minor percentages of waxes, fats, pectins, and water. Under natural conditions, cotton bolls facilitate the dispersal of the seeds.
The plant is a shrub native to tropical and subtropical regions around the world, including the Americas, Africa (including Egypt) and India. The greatest diversity of wild cotton species is found in Mexico, followed by Australia and Africa. Cotton was independently domesticated in the Old and New Worlds.
The fiber is most often spun into yarn or thread and used to make a soft, breathable, and durable textile. The use of cotton for fabric is known to date to prehistoric times; the presence of Gossypium barbadense has been identified at a site in Nanchoc District, Peru, and dated to the 7th-6th millennia BC, while indigo blue dyed textile fragments, dated to the 4th-3rd millennia BC, having been found at Huaca Prieta, in Peru. Fragments of a cotton thread, used to connect a string of eight copper beads and dated to the sixth millennium BC, have been found at Mehrgarh, Kachi, Pakistan.
Although cultivated since antiquity, it was the invention of the cotton gin that lowered the cost of production and led to its widespread use, and it is the most widely used natural fiber cloth in clothing today.
Current estimates for world production are about 25 million tonnes or 110 million bales annually, accounting for 2.5% of the world's arable land. India is the world's largest producer of cotton. The United States has been the largest exporter for many years.
== Types ==
There are four commercially grown species of cotton, all domesticated in antiquity:
Gossypium hirsutum – upland cotton, native to Central America, Mexico, the Caribbean and southern Florida (90% of world production)
Gossypium barbadense – known as extra-long staple cotton, native to tropical South America (over 5% of world production)
Gossypium arboreum – tree cotton, native to India and Pakistan (less than 2%)
Gossypium herbaceum – Levant cotton, native to southern Africa and the Arabian Peninsula (less than 2%)
Hybrid varieties are also cultivated. The two New World cotton species account for the vast majority of modern cotton production, but the two Old World species were widely used before the 1900s. While cotton fibers occur naturally in colors of white, brown, pink and green, fears of contaminating the genetics of white cotton have led many cotton-growing locations to ban the growing of colored cotton varieties.
== Etymology ==
The word "cotton" has Arabic origins, derived from the Arabic word قطن (qutn or qutun) which is ultimately derived from the Hebrew כֻּתֹּנֶת kuttṓnĕṯ, ironically meaning a clothing made of linen. This was the usual word for cotton in medieval Arabic. Marco Polo in chapter 2 in his book, describes a province he calls Khotan in Turkestan, today's Xinjiang, where cotton was grown in abundance. The word entered the Romance languages in the mid-12th century, and English a century later. Cotton fabric was known to the ancient Romans as an import, but cotton was rare in the Romance-speaking lands until imports from the Arabic-speaking lands in the later medieval era at transformatively lowered prices.
== History ==
=== Early history ===
==== Americas ====
The presence of the indigenous species Gossypium barbadense has been identified at a site in Nanchoc District, Peru, and dated to the 7th–6th millennia BC, while indigo blue dyed textile fragments, dated to the 4th–3rd millennia BC, having been found at Huaca Prieta, Peru. Cultivation of the indigenous cotton species G. barbadense from a find in Ancon, Peru has been dated to c. 4200 BC, and was the backbone of the development of coastal cultures such as the Norte Chico, Moche, and Nazca. Cotton was grown upriver, made into nets, and traded with fishing villages along the coast for large supplies of fish. The Spanish who came to Mexico and Peru in the early 16th century found the people growing cotton and wearing clothing made of it.
Cotton bolls from in a cave near Tehuacán, Mexico, have been dated to as early as 5500 BC. The domestication of Gossypium hirsutum, in Mexico, is dated to between around 3400 and 2300 BC. During this time, people between the Río Santiago and the Río Balsas grew, spun, wove, dyed, and sewed cotton. What they did not use themselves, they sent to their Aztec rulers as tribute, on the scale of ~116 million pounds (53,000 tonnes) annually.
==== South Asia ====
The earliest evidence of the use of cotton in the Old World, in the form of a few fibres of mineralised cotton thread, was found in a string of eight copper beads at the Neolithic site of Mehrgarh, at the foot of the Bolan Pass, Balochistan, Pakistan. Fragments of cotton textiles and spindle whorls, dated to the 3rd millennium BCE, have also been found at Mohenjo-daro, in Sindh, Pakistan, and other sites of the Bronze Age Indus Valley civilization, which is a likely site for the first cultivation of Gossypium arboreum, and cotton may have been an important export from it.
==== Levant ====
Microremains of cotton fibers, some dyed, have been found at Tel Tsaf in the Jordan Valley dated 5,200 BCE. They may be the remnants of ancient clothing, fabric containers, or cordage. Research suggest the cotton might come from wild species in South Asia, and traded with the Indus Valley Civilisation.
==== Iran ====
In Iran (Persia), the history of cotton dates back to the Achaemenid era (5th century BC); however, there are few sources about the planting of cotton in pre-Islamic Iran. Cotton cultivation was common in Merv, Ray and Pars. In Persian poems, especially Ferdowsi's Shahnameh, there are references to cotton ("panbe" in Persian). Marco Polo (13th century) refers to the major products of Persia, including cotton. John Chardin, a French traveler of the 17th century who visited Safavid Persia, spoke approvingly of the vast cotton farms of Persia.
==== Arabia ====
The Greeks and the Arabs were not familiar with cotton until the wars of Alexander the Great, as his contemporary Megasthenes told Seleucus I Nicator of "there being trees on which wool grows" in "Indica". This may be a reference to "tree cotton", Gossypium arboreum, which is native to the Indian subcontinent.
According to the Columbia Encyclopedia:
Cotton has been spun, woven, and dyed since prehistoric times. It clothed the people of ancient India, Egypt, and China. Hundreds of years before the Christian era, cotton textiles were woven in India with matchless skill, and their use spread to the Mediterranean countries.
==== Kingdom of Kush ====
Cotton (Gossypium herbaceum Linnaeus) may have been domesticated 5000 BC in eastern Sudan near the Middle Nile Basin region, where cotton cloth was being produced. Around the 4th century BC, the cultivation of cotton and the knowledge of its spinning and weaving in Meroë reached a high level. The export of textiles was one of the sources of wealth for Meroë. Ancient Nubia had a "culture of cotton" of sorts, evidenced by physical evidence of cotton processing tools and the presence of cattle in certain areas. Some researchers propose that cotton was important to the Nubian economy for its use in contact with the neighboring Egyptians. Aksumite King Ezana boasted in his inscription that he destroyed large cotton plantations in Meroë during his conquest of the region.
In the Meroitic Period (beginning 3rd century BCE), many cotton textiles have been recovered, preserved due to favorable arid conditions. Most of these fabric fragments come from Lower Nubia, and the cotton textiles account for 85% of the archaeological textiles from Classic/Late Meroitic sites. Due to these arid conditions, cotton, a plant that usually thrives moderate rainfall and richer soils, requires extra irrigation and labor in Sudanese climate conditions. Therefore, a great deal of resources would have been required, likely restricting its cultivation to the elite. In the first to third centuries CE, recovered cotton fragments all began to mirror the same style and production method, as seen from the direction of spun cotton and technique of weaving. Cotton textiles also appear in places of high regard, such as on funerary stelae and statues.
==== China ====
During the Han dynasty (207 BC - 220 AD), cotton was grown by Chinese peoples in the southern Chinese province of Yunnan.
=== Middle Ages ===
==== Eastern world ====
Egyptians grew and spun cotton in the first seven centuries of the Christian era.
Handheld roller cotton gins had been used in India since the 6th century, and was then introduced to other countries from there. Between the 12th and 14th centuries, dual-roller gins appeared in India and China. The Indian version of the dual-roller gin was prevalent throughout the Mediterranean cotton trade by the 16th century. This mechanical device was, in some areas, driven by water power.
The earliest clear illustrations of the spinning wheel come from the Islamic world in the eleventh century. The earliest unambiguous reference to a spinning wheel in India is dated to 1350, suggesting that the spinning wheel was likely introduced from Iran to India during the Delhi Sultanate.
==== Europe ====
During the late medieval period, cotton became known as an imported fiber in northern Europe, without any knowledge of how it was derived, other than that it was a plant. Because Herodotus had written in his Histories, Book III, 106, that in India trees grew in the wild producing wool, it was assumed that the plant was a tree, rather than a shrub. This aspect is retained in the name for cotton in several Germanic languages, such as German Baumwolle, which translates as "tree wool" (Baum means "tree"; Wolle means "wool"). Noting its similarities to wool, people in the region could only imagine that cotton must be produced by plant-borne sheep. John Mandeville, writing in 1350, stated as fact that "There grew there [India] a wonderful tree which bore tiny lambs on the endes of its branches. These branches were so pliable that they bent down to allow the lambs to feed when they are hungry." (See Vegetable Lamb of Tartary.)
Cotton manufacture was introduced to Europe during the Muslim conquest of the Iberian Peninsula and Sicily. The knowledge of cotton weaving was spread to northern Italy in the 12th century, when Sicily was conquered by the Normans, and consequently to the rest of Europe. The spinning wheel, introduced to Europe circa 1350, improved the speed of cotton spinning. By the 15th century, Venice, Antwerp, and Haarlem were important ports for cotton trade, and the sale and transportation of cotton fabrics had become very profitable.
=== Early modern period ===
==== Mughal India ====
Under the Mughal Empire, which ruled in the Indian subcontinent from the early 16th century to the early 18th century, Indian cotton production increased, in terms of both raw cotton and cotton textiles. The Mughals introduced agrarian reforms such as a new revenue system that was biased in favour of higher value cash crops such as cotton and indigo, providing state incentives to grow cash crops, in addition to rising market demand.
The largest manufacturing industry in the Mughal Empire was cotton textile manufacturing, which included the production of piece goods, calicos, and muslins, available unbleached and in a variety of colours. The cotton textile industry was responsible for a large part of the empire's international trade. India had a 25% share of the global textile trade in the early 18th century. Indian cotton textiles were the most important manufactured goods in world trade in the 18th century, consumed across the world from the Americas to Japan. The most important center of cotton production was the Bengal Subah province, particularly around its capital city of Dhaka.
The worm gear roller cotton gin, which was invented in India during the early Delhi Sultanate era of the 13th–14th centuries, came into use in the Mughal Empire some time around the 16th century, and is still used in India through to the present day. Another innovation, the incorporation of the crank handle in the cotton gin, first appeared in India some time during the late Delhi Sultanate or the early Mughal Empire. The production of cotton, which may have largely been spun in the villages and then taken to towns in the form of yarn to be woven into cloth textiles, was advanced by the diffusion of the spinning wheel across India shortly before the Mughal era, lowering the costs of yarn and helping to increase demand for cotton. The diffusion of the spinning wheel, and the incorporation of the worm gear and crank handle into the roller cotton gin, led to greatly expanded Indian cotton textile production during the Mughal era.
It was reported that, with an Indian cotton gin, which is half machine and half tool, one man and one woman could clean 28 pounds (13 kg) of cotton per day. With a modified Forbes version, one man and a boy could produce 250 pounds (110 kg) per day. If oxen were used to power 16 of these machines, and a few people's labour was used to feed them, they could produce as much work as 750 people did formerly.
==== Egypt ====
In the early 19th century, a Frenchman named M. Jumel proposed to the great ruler of Egypt, Mohamed Ali Pasha, that he could earn a substantial income by growing an extra-long staple Maho (Gossypium barbadense) cotton, in Lower Egypt, for the French market. Mohamed Ali Pasha accepted the proposition and granted himself the monopoly on the sale and export of cotton in Egypt; and later dictated cotton should be grown in preference to other crops.
Egypt under Muhammad Ali in the early 19th century had the fifth most productive cotton industry in the world, in terms of the number of spindles per capita. The industry was initially driven by machinery that relied on traditional energy sources, such as slave labour, animal power, water wheels, and windmills, which were also the principal energy sources in Western Europe up until around 1870. It was under Muhammad Ali in the early 19th century that steam engines were introduced to the Egyptian cotton industry.
By the time of the American Civil war annual exports had reached $16 million (120,000 bales), which rose to $56 million by 1864, primarily due to the loss of the Confederate supply on the world market. Exports continued to grow even after the reintroduction of US cotton, produced now by a paid workforce, and Egyptian exports reached 1.2 million bales a year by 1903.
=== Britain ===
==== East India Company ====
The English East India Company (EIC) introduced the British to cheap calico and chintz cloth on the restoration of the monarchy in the 1660s. Initially imported as a novelty side line, from its spice trading posts in Asia, the cheap colourful cloth proved popular and overtook the EIC's spice trade by value in the late 17th century. The EIC embraced the demand, particularly for calico, by expanding its factories in Asia and producing and importing cloth in bulk, creating competition for domestic woollen and linen textile producers. The impacted weavers, spinners, dyers, shepherds and farmers objected and the calico question became one of the major issues of National politics between the 1680s and the 1730s. Parliament began to see a decline in domestic textile sales, and an increase in imported textiles from places like China and India. Seeing the East India Company and their textile importation as a threat to domestic textile businesses, Parliament passed the 1700 Calico Act, blocking the importation of cotton cloth. As there was no punishment for continuing to sell cotton cloth, smuggling of the popular material became commonplace. In 1721, dissatisfied with the results of the first act, Parliament passed a stricter addition, this time prohibiting the sale of most cottons, imported and domestic (exempting only thread Fustian and raw cotton). The exemption of raw cotton from the prohibition initially saw 2 thousand bales of cotton imported annually, to become the basis of a new indigenous industry, initially producing Fustian for the domestic market, though more importantly triggering the development of a series of mechanised spinning and weaving technologies, to process the material. This mechanised production was concentrated in new cotton mills, which slowly expanded until by the beginning of the 1770s seven thousand bales of cotton were imported annually, and pressure was put on Parliament, by the new mill owners, to remove the prohibition on the production and sale of pure cotton cloth, as they could easily compete with anything the EIC could import.
The acts were repealed in 1774, triggering a wave of investment in mill-based cotton spinning and production, doubling the demand for raw cotton within a couple of years, and doubling it again every decade, into the 1840s.
Indian cotton textiles, particularly those from Bengal, continued to maintain a competitive advantage up until the 19th century. In order to compete with India, Britain invested in labour-saving technical progress, while implementing protectionist policies such as bans and tariffs to restrict Indian imports. At the same time, the East India Company's rule in India contributed to its deindustrialization, opening up a new market for British goods, while the capital amassed from Bengal after its 1757 conquest was used to invest in British industries such as textile manufacturing and greatly increase British wealth. British colonization also forced open the large Indian market to British goods, which could be sold in India without tariffs or duties, compared to local Indian producers who were heavily taxed, while raw cotton was imported from India without tariffs to British factories which manufactured textiles from Indian cotton, giving Britain a monopoly over India's large market and cotton resources. India served as both a significant supplier of raw goods to British manufacturers and a large captive market for British manufactured goods. Britain eventually surpassed India as the world's leading cotton textile manufacturer in the 19th century.
India's cotton-processing sector changed during the East India Company (EIC) expansion in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, shifting from supplying the British market with finished textiles to supplying East Asia with raw cotton.[54] This occurred as artisan-produced textiles were no longer competitive with those produced industrially, and European markets began preferring cheaper, slave-produced, long-staple American and Egyptian cottons for their own manufacturing.
==== Industrial Revolution ====
The advent of the Industrial Revolution in Britain provided a great boost to cotton manufacture, as textiles emerged as Britain's leading export. In 1738, Lewis Paul and John Wyatt, of Birmingham, England, patented the roller spinning machine, as well as the flyer-and-bobbin system for drawing cotton to a more even thickness using two sets of rollers that traveled at different speeds. Later, the invention of the James Hargreaves' spinning jenny in 1764, Richard Arkwright's spinning frame in 1769 and Samuel Crompton's spinning mule in 1775 enabled British spinners to produce cotton yarn at much higher rates. From the late 18th century on, the British city of Manchester acquired the nickname "Cottonopolis" due to the cotton industry's omnipresence within the city, and Manchester's role as the heart of the global cotton trade.
Production capacity in Britain and the United States was improved by the invention of the modern cotton gin by the American Eli Whitney in 1793. Before the development of cotton gins, the cotton fibers had to be pulled from the seeds tediously by hand. By the late 1700s, a number of crude ginning machines had been developed. However, to produce a bale of cotton required over 600 hours of human labor, making large-scale production uneconomical in the United States, even with the use of humans as slave labor. The gin that Whitney manufactured (the Holmes design) reduced the hours down to just a dozen or so per bale. Although Whitney patented his own design for a cotton gin, he manufactured a prior design from Henry Odgen Holmes, for which Holmes filed a patent in 1796. Improving technology and increasing control of world markets allowed British traders to develop a commercial chain in which raw cotton fibers were (at first) purchased from colonial plantations, processed into cotton cloth in the mills of Lancashire, and then exported on British ships to captive colonial markets in West Africa, India, and China (via Shanghai and Hong Kong).
By the 1840s, India was no longer capable of supplying the vast quantities of cotton fibers needed by mechanized British factories, while shipping bulky, low-price cotton from India to Britain was time-consuming and expensive. This, coupled with the emergence of American cotton as a superior type (due to the longer, stronger fibers of the two domesticated native American species, Gossypium hirsutum and Gossypium barbadense), encouraged British traders to purchase cotton from plantations in the United States and in the Caribbean. By the mid-19th century, "King Cotton" had become the backbone of the southern American economy. In the United States, cultivating and harvesting cotton became the leading occupation of slaves.
During the American Civil War, American cotton exports slumped due to a Union blockade on Southern ports, and because of a strategic decision by the Confederate government to cut exports, hoping to force Britain to recognize the Confederacy or enter the war. The Lancashire Cotton Famine prompted the main purchasers of cotton, Britain and France, to turn to Egyptian cotton. British and French traders invested heavily in cotton plantations. The Egyptian government of Viceroy Isma'il took out substantial loans from European bankers and stock exchanges. After the American Civil War ended in 1865, British and French traders abandoned Egyptian cotton and returned to cheap American exports, sending Egypt into a deficit spiral that led to the country declaring bankruptcy in 1876, a key factor behind Egypt's occupation by the British Empire in 1882.
During this time, cotton cultivation in the British Empire, especially Australia and India, greatly increased to replace the lost production of the American South. Through tariffs and other restrictions, the British government discouraged the production of cotton cloth in India; rather, the raw fiber was sent to England for processing. The Indian Mahatma Gandhi described the process:
English people buy Indian cotton in the field, picked by Indian labor at seven cents a day, through an optional monopoly.
This cotton is shipped on British ships, a three-week journey across the Indian Ocean, down the Red Sea, across the Mediterranean, through Gibraltar, across the Bay of Biscay and the Atlantic Ocean to London. One hundred per cent profit on this freight is regarded as small.
The cotton is turned into cloth in Lancashire. You pay shilling wages instead of Indian pennies to your workers. The English worker not only has the advantage of better wages, but the steel companies of England get the profit of building the factories and machines. Wages; profits; all these are spent in England.
The finished product is sent back to India at European shipping rates, once again on British ships. The captains, officers, sailors of these ships, whose wages must be paid, are English. The only Indians who profit are a few lascars who do the dirty work on the boats for a few cents a day.
The cloth is finally sold back to the kings and landlords of India who got the money to buy this expensive cloth out of the poor peasants of India who worked at seven cents a day.
=== United States ===
In the United States, growing Southern cotton generated significant wealth and capital for the antebellum South, as well as raw material for Northern textile industries. Before 1865 the cotton was largely produced through the labor of enslaved African Americans. It enriched both the Southern landowners and the new textile industries of the Northeastern United States and northwestern Europe. In 1860 the slogan "Cotton is king" characterized the attitude of Southern leaders toward this monocrop in that Europe would support an independent Confederate States of America in 1861 in order to protect the supply of cotton it needed for its very large textile industry.
Cotton remained a key crop in the Southern economy after slavery ended in 1865. Across the South, sharecropping evolved, in which landless farmers worked land owned by others in return for a share of the profits. Some farmers rented the land and bore the production costs themselves. Until mechanical cotton pickers were developed, cotton farmers needed additional labor to hand-pick cotton. Picking cotton was a source of income for families across the South. Rural and small town school systems had split vacations so children could work in the fields during "cotton-picking."
During the middle 20th century, employment in cotton farming fell, as machines began to replace laborers and the South's rural labor force dwindled during the World Wars. Cotton remains a major export of the United States, with large farms in California, Arizona and the Deep South. To acknowledge cotton's place in the history and heritage of Texas, the Texas Legislature designated cotton the official "State Fiber and Fabric of Texas" in 1997.
=== The Moon ===
China's Chang'e 4 spacecraft took cotton seeds to the Moon's far side. On 15 January 2019, China announced that a cotton seed sprouted, the first "truly otherworldly plant in history". Inside the Von Kármán Crater, the capsule and seeds sit inside the Chang'e 4 lander.
== Cultivation ==
Successful cultivation of cotton requires a long frost-free period, plenty of sunshine, and a moderate rainfall, usually from 50 to 100 cm (19.5 to 39.5 in). Soils usually need to be fairly heavy, although the level of nutrients does not need to be exceptional. In general, these conditions are met within the seasonally dry tropics and subtropics in the Northern and Southern hemispheres, but a large proportion of the cotton grown today is cultivated in areas with less rainfall that obtain the water from irrigation. Production of the crop for a given year usually starts soon after harvesting the preceding autumn. Cotton is naturally a perennial but is grown as an annual to help control pests. Planting time in spring in the Northern hemisphere varies from the beginning of February to the beginning of June. The area of the United States known as the South Plains is the largest contiguous cotton-growing region in the world. While dryland (non-irrigated) cotton is successfully grown in this region, consistent yields are only produced with heavy reliance on irrigation water drawn from the Ogallala Aquifer. Since cotton is somewhat salt and drought tolerant, this makes it an attractive crop for arid and semiarid regions. As water resources get tighter around the world, economies that rely on it face difficulties and conflict, as well as potential environmental problems. For example, improper cropping and irrigation practices have led to desertification in areas of Uzbekistan, where cotton is a major export. In the days of the Soviet Union, the Aral Sea was tapped for agricultural irrigation, largely of cotton, and now salination is widespread.
Cotton can also be cultivated to have colors other than the yellowish off-white typical of modern commercial cotton fibers. Naturally colored cotton can come in red, green, and several shades of brown.
=== Water footprint ===
The water footprint of cotton fibers is substantially larger than for most other plant fibers. Cotton is also known as a thirsty crop; on average, globally, cotton requires 8,000–10,000 liters of water for one kilogram of cotton, and in dry areas, it may require even more such as in some areas of India, it may need 22,500 liters.
=== Genetic modification ===
Genetically modified (GM) cotton was developed to reduce the heavy reliance on pesticides. The bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) naturally produces a chemical harmful only to a small fraction of insects, most notably the larvae of moths and butterflies, beetles, and flies, and harmless to other forms of life. The gene coding for Bt toxin has been inserted into cotton, causing cotton, called Bt cotton, to produce this natural insecticide in its tissues. In many regions, the main pests in commercial cotton are lepidopteran larvae, which are killed by the Bt protein in the transgenic cotton they eat. This eliminates the need to use large amounts of broad-spectrum insecticides to kill lepidopteran pests (some of which have developed pyrethroid resistance). This spares natural insect predators in the farm ecology and further contributes to noninsecticide pest management.
However, Bt cotton is ineffective against many cotton pests, such as plant bugs, stink bugs, and aphids; depending on circumstances it may still be desirable to use insecticides against these. A 2006 study done by Cornell researchers, the Center for Chinese Agricultural Policy and the Chinese Academy of Science on Bt cotton farming in China found that after seven years these secondary pests that were normally controlled by pesticide had increased, necessitating the use of pesticides at similar levels to non-Bt cotton and causing less profit for farmers because of the extra expense of GM seeds. However, a 2009 study by the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Stanford University and Rutgers University refuted this. They concluded that the GM cotton effectively controlled bollworm. The secondary pests were mostly miridae (plant bugs) whose increase was related to local temperature and rainfall and only continued to increase in half the villages studied. Moreover, the increase in insecticide use for the control of these secondary insects was far smaller than the reduction in total insecticide use due to Bt cotton adoption. A 2012 Chinese study concluded that Bt cotton halved the use of pesticides and doubled the level of ladybirds, lacewings and spiders. The International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-biotech Applications (ISAAA) said that, worldwide, GM cotton was planted on an area of 25 million hectares in 2011. This was 69% of the worldwide total area planted in cotton.
GM cotton acreage in India grew at a rapid rate, increasing from 50,000 hectares in 2002 to 10.6 million hectares in 2011. The total cotton area in India was 12.1 million hectares in 2011, so GM cotton was grown on 88% of the cotton area. This made India the country with the largest area of GM cotton in the world. A long-term study on the economic impacts of Bt cotton in India, published in the Journal PNAS in 2012, showed that Bt cotton has increased yields, profits, and living standards of smallholder farmers. The U.S. GM cotton crop was 4.0 million hectares in 2011 the second largest area in the world, the Chinese GM cotton crop was third largest by area with 3.9 million hectares and Pakistan had the fourth largest GM cotton crop area of 2.6 million hectares in 2011. The initial introduction of GM cotton proved to be a success in Australia – the yields were equivalent to the non-transgenic varieties and the crop used much less pesticide to produce (85% reduction). The subsequent introduction of a second variety of GM cotton led to increases in GM cotton production until 95% of the Australian cotton crop was GM in 2009 making Australia the country with the fifth largest GM cotton crop in the world. Other GM cotton growing countries in 2011 were Argentina, Myanmar, Burkina Faso, Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, South Africa and Costa Rica.
Cotton has been genetically modified for resistance to glyphosate a broad-spectrum herbicide discovered by Monsanto which also sells some of the Bt cotton seeds to farmers. There are also a number of other cotton seed companies selling GM cotton around the world. About 62% of the GM cotton grown from 1996 to 2011 was insect resistant, 24% stacked product and 14% herbicide resistant.
Cotton has gossypol, a toxin that makes it inedible. However, scientists have silenced the gene that produces the toxin, making it a potential food crop. On 17 October 2018, the USDA deregulated GE low-gossypol cotton.
=== Organic production ===
Organic cotton is generally understood as cotton from plants not genetically modified and that is certified to be grown without the use of any synthetic agricultural chemicals, such as fertilizers or pesticides. Its production also promotes and enhances biodiversity and biological cycles. In the United States, organic cotton plantations are required to enforce the National Organic Program (NOP). This institution determines the allowed practices for pest control, growing, fertilizing, and handling of organic crops. As of 2007, 265,517 bales of organic cotton were produced in 24 countries, and worldwide production was growing at a rate of more than 50% per year. Organic cotton products are now available for purchase at limited locations. These are popular for baby clothes and diapers; natural cotton products are known to be both sustainable and hypoallergenic.
=== Pests and weeds ===
The cotton industry relies heavily on chemicals, such as fertilizers, insecticides and herbicides, although a very small number of farmers are moving toward an organic model of production. Under most definitions, organic products do not use transgenic Bt cotton which contains a bacterial gene that codes for a plant-produced protein that is toxic to a number of pests especially the bollworms. For most producers, Bt cotton has allowed a substantial reduction in the use of synthetic insecticides, although in the long term resistance may become problematic.
==== Global pest problems ====
Significant global pests of cotton include various species of bollworm, such as Pectinophora gossypiella. Sucking pests include cotton stainers, the chili thrips, Scirtothrips dorsalis; the cotton seed bug, Oxycarenus hyalinipennis. Defoliators include the fall armyworm, Spodoptera frugiperda.
Cotton yield is threatened by the evolution of new biotypes of insects and of new pathogens. Maintaining good yield requires strategies to slow these adversaries' evolution.
==== North American insect pests ====
Historically, in North America, one of the most economically destructive pests in cotton production has been the boll weevil. Boll weevils are beetles who ate cotton in the 1950s, that slowed the production of the cotton industry drastically. "This bone pile of short budgets, loss of market share, failing prices, abandoned farms, and the new immunity of boll weevils generated a feeling of helplessness" Boll Weevils first appeared in Beeville, Texas wiping out field after field of cotton in south Texas. This swarm of Boll Weevils swept through east Texas and spread to the eastern seaboard, leaving ruin and devastation in its path, causing many cotton farmers to go out of business.
Due to the US Department of Agriculture's highly successful Boll Weevil Eradication Program (BWEP), this pest has been eliminated from cotton in most of the United States. This program, along with the introduction of genetically engineered Bt cotton, has improved the management of a number of pests such as cotton bollworm and pink bollworm. Sucking pests include the cotton stainer, Dysdercus suturellus and the tarnish plant bug, Lygus lineolaris. A significant cotton disease is caused by Xanthomonas citri subsp. malvacearum.
== Harvesting ==
Most cotton in the United States, Europe and Australia is harvested mechanically, either by a cotton picker, a machine that removes the cotton from the boll without damaging the cotton plant, or by a cotton stripper, which strips the entire boll off the plant. Cotton strippers are used in regions where it is too windy to grow picker varieties of cotton, and usually after application of a chemical defoliant or the natural defoliation that occurs after a freeze. Cotton is a perennial crop in the tropics, and without defoliation or freezing, the plant will continue to grow.
Cotton continues to be picked by hand in developing countries and in Xinjiang, China, allegedly by forced labor. Xinjiang produces over 20% of the world's cotton.
== Competition from synthetic fibers ==
The era of manufactured fibers began with the development of rayon in France in the 1890s. Rayon is derived from a natural cellulose and cannot be considered synthetic, but requires extensive processing in a manufacturing process, and led the less expensive replacement of more naturally derived materials. A succession of new synthetic fibers were introduced by the chemicals industry in the following decades. Acetate in fiber form was developed in 1924. Nylon, the first fiber synthesized entirely from petrochemicals, was introduced as a sewing thread by DuPont in 1936, followed by DuPont's acrylic in 1944. Some garments were created from fabrics based on these fibers, such as women's hosiery from nylon, but it was not until the introduction of polyester into the fiber marketplace in the early 1950s that the market for cotton came under threat. The rapid uptake of polyester garments in the 1960s caused economic hardship in cotton-exporting economies, especially in Central American countries, such as Nicaragua, where cotton production had boomed tenfold between 1950 and 1965 with the advent of cheap chemical pesticides. Cotton production recovered in the 1970s, but crashed to pre-1960 levels in the early 1990s.
== Competition from natural fibers ==
High water and pesticide use in cotton cultivation has prompted sustainability concerns and created a market for natural fiber alternatives. Other cellulose fibers, such as hemp, are seen as more sustainable options because of higher yields per acre with less water and pesticide use than cotton. Cellulose fiber alternatives have similar characteristics but are not perfect substitutes for cotton textiles with differences in properties like tensile strength and thermal regulation.
== Uses ==
Cotton is used to make a number of textile products. These include terrycloth for highly absorbent bath towels and robes; denim for blue jeans; cambric, popularly used in the manufacture of blue work shirts (from which the term "blue-collar" is derived) and corduroy, seersucker, and cotton twill. Socks, underwear, and most T-shirts are made from cotton. Bed sheets often are made from cotton. It is a preferred material for sheets as it is hypoallergenic, easy to maintain and non-irritant to the skin. Cotton also is used to make yarn used in crochet and knitting. Fabric also can be made from recycled or recovered cotton that otherwise would be thrown away during the spinning, weaving, or cutting process. While many fabrics are made completely of cotton, some materials blend cotton with other fibers, including rayon and synthetic fibers such as polyester. It can either be used in knitted or woven fabrics, as it can be blended with elastine to make a stretchier thread for knitted fabrics, and apparel such as stretch jeans. Cotton can be blended also with linen producing fabrics with the benefits of both materials. Linen-cotton blends are wrinkle resistant and retain heat more effectively than only linen, and are thinner, stronger and lighter than only cotton.
In addition to the textile industry, cotton is used in fishing nets, coffee filters, tents, explosives manufacture (see nitrocellulose), cotton paper, and in bookbinding. Fire hoses were once made of cotton.
=== Cottonseed ===
The cottonseed which remains after the cotton is ginned is used to produce cottonseed oil, which, after refining, can be consumed by humans like any other vegetable oil. The cottonseed meal that is left generally is fed to ruminant livestock; the gossypol remaining in the meal is toxic to monogastric animals. Cottonseed hulls can be added to dairy cattle rations for roughage. During the American slavery period, cotton root bark was used in folk remedies as an abortifacient, that is, to induce a miscarriage. Gossypol was one of the many substances found in all parts of the cotton plant and it was described by the scientists as 'poisonous pigment'. It also appears to inhibit the development of sperm or even restrict the mobility of the sperm. Also, it is thought to interfere with the menstrual cycle by restricting the release of certain hormones.
=== Cotton linters ===
Cotton linters are fine, silky fibers which adhere to the seeds of the cotton plant after ginning. These curly fibers typically are less than 1⁄8 inch (3.2 mm) long. The term also may apply to the longer textile fiber staple lint as well as the shorter fuzzy fibers from some upland species. Linters are traditionally used in the manufacture of paper and as a raw material in the manufacture of cellulose. In the UK, linters are referred to as "cotton wool".
A less technical use of the term "cotton wool", in the UK and Ireland, is for the refined product known as "absorbent cotton" (or, often, just "cotton") in U.S. usage: fluffy cotton in sheets or balls used for medical, cosmetic, protective packaging, and many other practical purposes. Possibly the first medical use of cotton wool was by Sampson Gamgee at the Queen's Hospital (later the General Hospital) in Birmingham, England.
=== Long staple cotton ===
Long staple (LS cotton) is cotton of a longer fibre length and therefore of higher quality, while Extra-long staple cotton (ELS cotton) has longer fibre length still and of even higher quality. The name "Egyptian cotton" is broadly associated high quality cottons and is often an LS or (less often) an ELS cotton. Nowadays the name "Egyptian cotton" refers more to the way cotton is treated and threads produced rather than the location where it is grown. The American cotton variety Pima cotton is often compared to Egyptian cotton, as both are used in high quality bed sheets and other cotton products. While Pima cotton is often grown in the American southwest, the Pima name is now used by cotton-producing nations such as Peru, Australia and Israel. Not all products bearing the Pima name are made with the finest cotton: American-grown ELS Pima cotton is trademarked as Supima cotton. "Kasturi" cotton is a brand-building initiative for Indian long staple cotton by the Indian government. The PIB issued a press release announcing the same.
=== Ornamental use ===
Cottons have been grown as ornamentals or novelties due to their showy flowers and snowball-like fruit. For example, Jumel's cotton, once an important source of fiber in Egypt, started as an ornamental. However, agricultural authorities such as the Boll Weevil Eradication Program in the United States discourage using cotton as an ornamental, due to concerns about these plants harboring pests injurious to crops.
== International trade ==
The largest producers of cotton, as of 2017, are India and China, with annual production of about 18.53 million tonnes (4.09×1010 lb) and 17.14 million tonnes (3.78×1010 lb), respectively; most of this production is consumed by their respective textile industries. The largest exporters of raw cotton are the United States, with sales of $4.9 billion, and Africa, with sales of $2.1 billion. The total international trade is estimated to be $12 billion. Africa's share of the cotton trade has doubled since 1980. Neither area has a significant domestic textile industry, textile manufacturing having moved to developing nations in Eastern and South Asia such as India and China. In Africa, cotton is grown by numerous small holders. Dunavant Enterprises, based in Memphis, Tennessee, is the leading cotton broker in Africa, with hundreds of purchasing agents. It operates cotton gins in Uganda, Mozambique, and Zambia. In Zambia, it often offers loans for seed and expenses to the 180,000 small farmers who grow cotton for it, as well as advice on farming methods. Cargill also purchases cotton in Africa for export.
The 25,000 cotton growers in the United States are heavily subsidized at the rate of $2 billion per year although China now provides the highest overall level of cotton sector support. The future of these subsidies is uncertain and has led to anticipatory expansion of cotton brokers' operations in Africa. Dunavant expanded in Africa by buying out local operations. This is only possible in former British colonies and Mozambique; former French colonies continue to maintain tight monopolies, inherited from their former colonialist masters, on cotton purchases at low fixed prices.
To encourage trade and organize discussion about cotton, World Cotton Day is celebrated every October 7.
Cotton is included within World Trade Organization (WTO) activities within two "complementary tracks":
trade aspects, around multilateral negotiations aiming to address distorting subsidies and trade barriers affecting cotton; and
development assistance provided within the cotton production industry and its value chain.
An agreement on trade in cotton formed part of the ministerial declaration concluding the World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference of 2005.
== Production ==
In 2022, world production of cotton was 69.7 million tonnes, led by China with 26% of the total. Other major producers were India (22%) and the United States (12%) (table).
The five leading exporters of cotton in 2019 are (1) India, (2) the United States, (3) China, (4) Brazil, and (5) Pakistan.
In India, the states of Maharashtra (26.63%), Gujarat (17.96%) and Andhra Pradesh (13.75%) and also Madhya Pradesh are the leading cotton producing states, these states have a predominantly tropical wet and dry climate.
In the United States, the state of Texas led in total production as of 2004, while the state of California had the highest yield per acre.
=== Fair trade ===
Cotton is an enormously important commodity throughout the world. It provides livelihoods for up to 1 billion people, including 100 million smallholder farmers who cultivate cotton. However, many farmers in developing countries receive a low price for their produce, or find it difficult to compete with developed countries.
This has led to an international dispute (see Brazil–United States cotton dispute):
On 27 September 2002, Brazil requested consultations with the US regarding prohibited and actionable subsidies provided to US producers, users and/or exporters of upland cotton, as well as legislation, regulations, statutory instruments and amendments thereto providing such subsidies (including export credits), grants, and any other assistance to the US producers, users and exporters of upland cotton.
On 8 September 2004, the Panel Report recommended that the United States "withdraw" export credit guarantees and payments to domestic users and exporters, and "take appropriate steps to remove the adverse effects or withdraw" the mandatory price-contingent subsidy measures.
While Brazil was fighting the US through the WTO's Dispute Settlement Mechanism against a heavily subsidized cotton industry, a group of four least-developed African countries – Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, and Mali – also known as "Cotton-4" have been the leading protagonist for the reduction of US cotton subsidies through negotiations. The four introduced a "Sectoral Initiative in Favour of Cotton", presented by Burkina Faso's President Blaise Compaoré during the Trade Negotiations Committee on 10 June 2003.
In addition to concerns over subsidies, the cotton industries of some countries are criticized for employing child labor and damaging workers' health by exposure to pesticides used in production. The Environmental Justice Foundation has campaigned against the prevalent use of forced child and adult labor in cotton production in Uzbekistan, the world's third largest cotton exporter.
The international production and trade situation has led to "fair trade" cotton clothing and footwear, joining a rapidly growing market for organic clothing, fair fashion or "ethical fashion". The fair trade system was initiated in 2005 with producers from Cameroon, Mali and Senegal, with the Association Max Havelaar France playing a lead role in the establishment of this segment of the fair trade system in conjunction with Fairtrade International and the French organisation Dagris (Développement des Agro-Industries du Sud).
=== Trading ===
Cotton is bought and sold by investors and price speculators as a tradable commodity on two different commodity exchanges in the United States of America.
Cotton No. 2 futures contracts are traded on the ICE Futures US Softs (NYI) under the ticker symbol CT. They are delivered every year in March, May, July, October, and December.
Cotton futures contracts are traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) under the ticker symbol TT. They are delivered every year in March, May, July, October, and December.
=== Critical temperatures ===
Favorable travel temperature range: below 25 °C (77 °F)
Optimum travel temperature: 21 °C (70 °F)
Glow temperature: 205 °C (401 °F)
Fire point: 210 °C (410 °F)
Autoignition temperature: 360–425 °C (680–797 °F)
Autoignition temperature (for oily cotton): 120 °C (248 °F)
A temperature range of 25 to 35 °C (77 to 95 °F) is the optimal range for mold development. At temperatures below 0 °C (32 °F), rotting of wet cotton stops. Damaged cotton is sometimes stored at these temperatures to prevent further deterioration.
Egypt has a unique climatic temperature that the soil and the temperature provide an exceptional environment for cotton to grow rapidly.
== Fiber properties ==
Depending upon the origin, the chemical composition of cotton is as follows:
Cellulose 91.00%
Water 7.85%
Protoplasm, pectins 0.55%
Waxes, fatty substances 0.40%
Mineral salts 0.20%
=== Morphology ===
Cotton has a more complex structure among the other crops. A matured cotton fiber is a single, elongated complete dried multilayer cell that develops in the surface layer of cottonseed. It has the following parts.
The cuticle is the outer most layer. It is a waxy layer that contains pectins and proteinaceous materials.
The primary wall is the original thin cell wall. Primary wall is mainly cellulose, it is made up of a network of fine fibrils (small strands of cellulose).
The winding layer is the first layer of secondary thickening it is also called the S1 layer. It is different in structure from both the primary wall and the remainder of the secondary wall. It consists of fibrils aligned at 40 to 70-degree angles to the fiber axis in an open netting type of pattern.
The secondary wall consists of concentric layers of cellulose it is also called the S2 layer, that constitute the main portion of the cotton fiber. After the fiber has attained its maximum diameter, new layers of cellulose are added to form the secondary wall. The fibrils are deposited at 70 to 80-degree angles to the fiber axis, reversing angle at points along the length of the fiber.
The lumen is the hollow canal that runs the length of the fiber. It is filled with living protoplasm during the growth period. After the fiber matures and the boll opens, the protoplast dries up, and the lumen naturally collapses, leaving a central void, or pore space, in each fiber. It separates the secondary wall from the lumen and appears to be more resistant to certain reagents than the secondary wall layers. The lumen wall also called the S3 layer.
==== Dead cotton ====
Dead cotton is a term that refers to unripe cotton fibers that do not absorb dye. Dead cotton is immature cotton that has poor dye affinity and appears as white specks on a dyed fabric. When cotton fibers are analyzed and assessed through a microscope, dead fibers appear differently. Dead cotton fibers have thin cell walls. In contrast, mature fibers have more cellulose and a greater degree of cell wall thickening
== Genome ==
There is a public effort to sequence the genome of cotton. It was started in 2007 by a consortium of public researchers. Their aim is to sequence the genome of cultivated, tetraploid cotton. "Tetraploid" means that its nucleus has two separate genomes, called A and D. The consortium agreed to first sequence the D-genome wild relative of cultivated cotton (G. raimondii, a Central American species) because it is small and has few repetitive elements. It has nearly one-third of the bases of tetraploid cotton, and each chromosome occurs only once. Then, the A genome of G. arboreum would be sequenced. Its genome is roughly twice that of G. raimondii. Part of the difference in size is due to the amplification of retrotransposons (GORGE). After both diploid genomes are assembled, they would be used as models for sequencing the genomes of tetraploid cultivated species. Without knowing the diploid genomes, the euchromatic DNA sequences of AD genomes would co-assemble, and their repetitive elements would assemble independently into A and D sequences respectively. There would be no way to untangle the mess of AD sequences without comparing them to their diploid counterparts.
The public sector effort continues with the goal to create a high-quality, draft genome sequence from reads generated by all sources. The effort has generated Sanger reads of BACs, fosmids, and plasmids, as well as 454 reads. These later types of reads will be instrumental in assembling an initial draft of the D genome. In 2010, the companies Monsanto and Illumina completed enough Illumina sequencing to cover the D genome of G. raimondii about 50x. They announced that they would donate their raw reads to the public. This public relations effort gave them some recognition for sequencing the cotton genome. Once the D genome is assembled from all of this raw material, it will undoubtedly assist in the assembly of the AD genomes of cultivated varieties of cotton, but much work remains.
As of 2014, at least one assembled cotton genome had been reported.
== See also ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
Beckert, Sven. Empire of Cotton: A Global History. New York: Knopf, 2014.
Brown, D. Clayton. King Cotton: A Cultural, Political, and Economic History since 1945 (University Press of Mississippi, 2011) 440 pp. ISBN 978-1-60473-798-1
Ensminger, Audrey H. and Konlande, James E. Foods and Nutrition Encyclopedia, (2nd ed. CRC Press, 1993). ISBN 0-8493-8980-1
USDA – Cotton Trade
Moseley, W.G. and L.C. Gray (eds). Hanging by a Thread: Cotton, Globalization and Poverty in Africa (Ohio University Press and Nordic Africa Press, 2008). ISBN 978-0-89680-260-5
Riello, Giorgio (2013). Cotton: The Fabric that Made the Modern World. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-00022-3.
Smith, C. Wayne and Joe Tom Cothren. Cotton: origin, history, technology, and production (1999) 850 pages ISBN 978-0-471-18045-6
True, Alfred Charles. The cotton plant: its history, botany, chemistry, culture, enemies, and uses (U.S. Office of Experiment Stations, 1896) online edition
Yafa, Stephen H. (2005). Big Cotton: How a Humble Fiber Created Fortunes, Wrecked Civilizations, and Put America on the Map. Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-03367-6.
== External links ==
Official website of the International Cotton Association
National Cotton Council of America
"World Cotton Day". Retrieved 26 December 2023.
"Celebrating World Cotton Day: an opportunity to recognize the global importance of cotton". World Trade Organization. 7 October 2021. Retrieved 8 October 2021.
"Cotton" . New International Encyclopedia. 1905.
"Cotton" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 7 (11th ed.). 1911. pp. 256–281.
"Cotton" . Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921.

A weed is a plant considered undesirable in a particular situation, growing where it conflicts with human preferences, needs, or goals. Plants with characteristics that make them hazardous, aesthetically unappealing, difficult to control in managed environments, or otherwise unwanted in farm land, orchards, gardens, lawns, parks, recreational spaces, residential and industrial areas, may all be considered weeds. The concept of weeds is particularly significant in agriculture, where the presence of weeds in fields used to grow crops may cause major losses in yields. Invasive species, plants introduced to an environment where their presence negatively impacts the overall functioning and biodiversity of the ecosystem, may also sometimes be considered weeds.
Taxonomically, the term "weed" has no botanical significance, because a plant that is a weed in one context, is not a weed when growing in a situation where it is wanted. Some plants that are widely regarded as weeds are intentionally grown in gardens and other cultivated settings. For this reason, some plants are sometimes called beneficial weeds. Similarly, volunteer plants from a previous crop are regarded as weeds when growing in a subsequent crop. Thus, alternative nomenclature for the same plants might be hardy pioneers, cosmopolitan species, volunteers, "spontaneous urban vegetation," etc.
Although whether a plant is a weed depends on context, plants commonly defined as weeds broadly share biological characteristics that allow them to thrive in disturbed environments and to be particularly difficult to destroy or eradicate. In particular, weeds are adapted to thrive under human management in the same way as intentionally grown plants. Since the origins of agriculture on Earth, agricultural weeds have co-evolved with human crops and agricultural systems, and some have been domesticated into crops themselves after their fitness in agricultural settings became apparent.
More broadly, the term "weed" is occasionally applied pejoratively to species outside the plant kingdom, species that can survive in diverse environments and reproduce quickly; in this sense it has even been applied to humans.
Weed control is important in agriculture and horticulture. Methods include hand cultivation with hoes, powered cultivation with cultivators, smothering with mulch or soil solarization, lethal wilting with high heat, burning, or chemical attack with herbicides and cultural methods such as crop rotation and fallowing land to reduce the weed population.
== History ==
It has long been assumed that weeds, in the sense of rapidly evolving plants taking advantage of human-disturbed environments, evolved in response to the Neolithic agricultural revolution approximately 12,000 years ago. However, researchers have found evidence of "proto-weeds" behaving in similar ways at Ohalo II, a 23,000-year-old archeological site in Israel.
The idea of "weeds" as a category of undesirable plant has not been universal throughout history. Before 1200 A.D., little evidence exists of concern with weed control or of agricultural practices solely intended to control weeds. A possible reason for this is that for much of human history, women and children were an abundant source of cheap labor to control weeds, and not directly acknowledged. Weeds are assumed to have existed since the beginning of agriculture, and accepted as an "inevitable nuisance."
Though the plants are not named using a specific term denoting a "weed" in the contemporary sense, plants that may be interpreted as "weeds" are referenced in the Bible:
Cursed is the ground because of you; through painful toil you will eat of it all the days of your life. It will produce thorns and thistles for you, and you will eat the plants of the field. By the sweat of your brow you will eat your food until you return to the ground.
Some early Roman writers referenced weeding activities in agricultural fields, but weed control in the pre-modern era was probably an incidental effect of plowing. Ancient Egyptians, Assyrians, and Sumerians had no specific word for "weeds," seeing all plants as having some use. The English word "weed" can be traced back to the Old English weod, which refers to woad, rather than a category of plant as in the modern usage; in early medieval European herbals, each plant is regarded as having its own "virtues".
By the sixteenth century, the concept of a "weed" was better defined as a "noxious" or undesirable type of plant, as referenced metaphorically in William Shakespeare's works. An example of a Shakespearean reference to weeds is found in Sonnet 69:
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds: / But why thy odour matcheth not thy show, / The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.
In London during this period, poor women were paid low wages to weed gardens and courtyards.
After the Reformation, Christian theology that emphasized the degradation of nature after the Fall of Man, and humankind's role and duty to dominate and subdue nature, became more developed and widespread. Various European writers designated certain plants as "vermin" and "filth," though many plants identified as such were valued by gardeners or by herbalists and apothecaries, and some questioned the idea that any plant could be without purpose or value. Laws mandating the control of weeds emerged as early as the seventeenth century; in 1691 a law in New York required the removal of "poysonous and Stincking Weeds" in front of houses.
In the nineteenth century, manual labor was used to control weeds in European towns and cities, and chemical methods of weed control emerged. For example, a French journal in 1831 documented a mixture of sulfur, lime and water boiled in an iron cauldron as an effective herbicide to prevent grass from growing among cobblestones.
The cultural association between weeds and moral or spiritual degradation persisted into the last nineteenth century in American cities. Urban expansion and development created ideal habitats for weeds in nineteenth-century America. Reformers consequently saw weeds as a part of the larger problem of filth, disease, and moral corruption that plagued the urban environments, and weeds were seen as refuge for "tramps" and other criminal or undesirable people. The St. Louis Post-Dispatch credited weeds as causing diphtheria, scarlet fever, and typhoid. In St. Louis between the years of 1905-1910, weeds became viewed as a major public health hazard, believed to cause typhoid and malaria, and legal precedents were set in order to control weeds that would help facilitate the adoption of weed control laws throughout the country.
== Ecological significance ==
"Weed" as a category of plant overlaps with the closely related concepts of ruderal and pioneer species. Pioneer species are specifically adapted to disturbed environments, where the existing plant and soil community has been disrupted or damaged in some way. Adaptation to disturbance can give weeds advantages over desirable crops, pastures, or ornamental plants. The nature of the habitat and its disturbances will affect or even determine which types of weed communities become dominant. In weed ecology some authorities speak of the relationship between "the three Ps": plant, place, perception. These have been very variously defined, but the weed traits listed by H.G. Baker are widely cited.
Examples of such ruderal or pioneer species include plants that are adapted to naturally occurring disturbed environments such as dunes and other windswept areas with shifting soils, alluvial flood plains, river banks and deltas, and areas that are burned repeatedly. Since human agricultural and horticultural practices often mimic these natural disturbances that weedy species have adapted for, some weeds are effectively preadapted to grow and proliferate in human-disturbed areas such as agricultural fields, lawns, gardens, roadsides, and construction sites. As agricultural practices continue and develop, weeds evolve further, with humans exerting evolutionary pressure upon weeds through manipulating their habitat and attempting to control weed populations.
Due to their ability to survive and thrive in conditions challenging or hostile to other plants, weeds have been considered extremophiles.
=== Adaptability ===
Due to their evolutionary heritage as disturbance-adapted pioneers, most weeds exhibit incredibly high phenotype plasticity, meaning that individual plants hold the potential to adapt their morphology, growth, and appearance in response to their conditions. The potential within a single individual to adapt to a wide variety of conditions is sometimes referred to as an "all-purpose genotype." Disturbance-adapted plants typically grow rapidly and reproduce quickly, with some annual weeds having multiple generations in a single growing season. They commonly have seeds that persist in the soil seed bank for many years. Perennial weeds often have underground stems that spread under the soil surface or, like ground ivy (Glechoma hederacea), have creeping stems that root and spread out over the ground. These traits make many disturbance-adapted plants highly successful as weeds.
On top of the ability of individual plants to adapt to their conditions, weed populations also evolve much more quickly than older models of evolution account for. Once established in an agricultural setting, weeds have been observed to undergo evolutionary changes to adapt to selective pressures imposed by human management. Some examples include changes in seed dormancy, changes in seasonal life cycles, changes in plant morphology, and the evolution of resistance to herbicides. Rapid life cycles, large populations, and ability to spread large numbers of seeds long distances also allow weed species with these general characteristics to evolve quickly.
=== Dispersal ===
The concept of weeds also overlaps with the concept of invasive species, both in the sense that human activities tend to introduce weeds outside their native range, and that an introduced species may be considered a weed. Many weed species have moved out of their natural geographic ranges and spread around the world in tandem with human migrations and commerce. Weed seeds are often collected and transported with crops after the harvesting of grains, so humans are a vector of transport as well as a producer of the disturbed environments to which weed species are well adapted, resulting in many weeds having a close association with human activities.
Some plants become dominant when introduced into new environments because the animals and plants in their original environment that compete with them or feed on them are absent; in what is sometimes called the "natural enemies hypothesis", plants freed from these specialist consumers may become dominant. An example is Klamath weed, which threatened millions of hectares of prime grain and grazing land in North America after it was accidentally introduced. The Klamathweed Beetle, a species that specializes in consuming the plant, was imported during World War II. Within several years Klamath weed was reduced to a rare roadside weed. In locations where predation and mutually competitive relationships are absent, weeds have increased resources available for growth and reproduction. The weediness of some species that are introduced into new environments may be caused by their production of allelopathic chemicals which indigenous plants are not yet adapted to, a scenario sometimes called the "novel weapons hypothesis". These chemicals may limit the growth of established plants or the germination and growth of seeds and seedlings. Weed growth can also inhibit the growth of later-successional species in ecological succession.
Introduced species have been observed to undergo rapid evolutionary change to adapt to their new environments, with changes in plant height, size, leaf shape, dispersal ability, reproductive output, vegetative reproduction ability, level of dependence on the mycorrhizal network, and level of phenotype plasticity appearing on timescales of decades to centuries. Invasive species can be more adaptable in their new environments than in their native environments, occupying broader ranges in areas where they are invasive than in areas where they are native. Hybridization between similar species can produce novel invasive plants that are better adapted to their surroundings. Polyploidy is also observed to be strongly selected for among some invasive populations, such as Solidago canadensis in China. Many weed species are now found almost worldwide, with novel adaptations that suit regional populations to their environments.
== Negative impacts ==
Some negative impacts of weeds are functional: they interfere with food and fiber production in agriculture, wherein they must be controlled to prevent lost or diminished crop yields. In other settings, they interfere with other cosmetic, decorative, or recreational goals, such as in lawns, landscape architecture, playing fields, and golf courses. In the case of invasive species, they can be of concern for environmental reasons, when introduced species outcompete native plants and cause broader damage to ecosystem health and functioning.
Some weed species have been classified as noxious weeds by government authorities because, if left unchecked, they often compete with native or crop plants or cause harm to livestock. They are often foreign species accidentally or imprudently imported into a region where there are few natural controls to limit their population and spread.
In a range of contexts, weeds can have negative impacts by:
competing with the desired plants for the resources that a plant typically needs, namely, direct sunlight, soil nutrients, water, and (to a lesser extent) space for growth,
providing hosts and vectors for plant pathogens, giving them greater opportunity to infect and degrade the quality of the desired plants;
providing food or shelter for animal pests such as seed-eating birds and Tephritid fruit flies that otherwise could hardly survive seasonal shortages;
offering irritation to the skin or digestive tracts of people or animals, either physical irritation via thorns, prickles, or burs, or chemical irritation via natural poisons or irritants in the weed (for example, the poisons found in Nerium species);
causing root damage to engineering works such as drains, road surfaces, and foundations,
in the case of aquatic plants, obstructing or clogging streams and waterways, which interferes with boating, irrigation systems, fishing, and hydroelectric power.
== Positive impacts ==
While the term "weed" generally has a negative connotation, many plants known as weeds can have beneficial properties. A number of weeds, such as the dandelion (Taraxacum) and lamb's quarter, are edible, and their leaves or roots may be used for food or herbal medicine. Burdock is common over much of the world, and is sometimes used to make soup and medicine in East Asia. Some weeds attract beneficial insects, which in turn can protect crops from harmful pests. Weeds can also prevent pest insects from finding a crop, because their presence disrupts the incidence of positive cues which pests use to locate their food. Weeds may also act as a "living mulch", providing ground cover that reduces moisture loss and prevents erosion. Weeds may also improve soil fertility; dandelions, for example, bring up nutrients like calcium and nitrogen from deep in the soil with their taproot, and clover hosts nitrogen-fixing bacteria in its roots, fertilizing the soil directly. The dandelion is also one of several species which break up hardpan in overly cultivated fields, helping crops grow deeper root systems. Some garden flowers originated as weeds in cultivated fields and have been selectively bred for their garden-worthy flowers or foliage. An example of a crop weed that is grown in gardens is the corncockle (Agrostemma githago), which was a common weed in European wheat fields, but is now sometimes grown as a garden plant.
=== Ecological role ===
As pioneer species, weeds begin the process of ecological succession after a disturbance event. The rapid, aggressive growth of weeds rapidly prevents erosion in newly exposed bare soil, and has substantially slowed topsoil loss due to anthropogenic disturbances.
=== In climate change adaptation ===
It has been suggested that weeds, with their aggressive ability to adapt, could provide humans with vital tools and knowledge for climate change adaptation. Some researchers argue that researching weed species could offer valuable insights for crop breeding, or that weeds themselves hold potential as hardy, climate-change-resistant crops. Adaptable weeds could also be a source of transgenic genes which could confer useful traits upon crops.
Weed species have been used in the restoration of land in Australia using a method called natural sequence farming. This method allows non-native weeds to stabilize and restore degraded areas where native species are not yet capable of regenerating themselves.
== Weeds as adaptable species ==
An alternate definition often used by biologists is any species, not just plants, that can quickly adapt to any environment. Some traits of weedy species are the ability to reproduce quickly, disperse widely, live in a variety of habitats, establish a population in strange places, succeed in disturbed ecosystems and resist eradication once established. Such species often do well in human-dominated environments as other species are not able to adapt. Common examples include the common pigeon, brown rat and the raccoon. Other weedy species have been able to expand their range without actually living in human environments, as human activity has damaged the ecosystems of other species. These include the coyote, the white-tailed deer and the brown headed cowbird.
In response to the idea that humans may face extinction due to environmental degradation, paleontologist David Jablonsky counters by arguing that humans are a weed species. Like other weedy species, humans are widely dispersed in a wide variety of environments, and are highly unlikely to go extinct no matter how much damage the environment faces.
== Plants often considered to be weeds ==
White clover is considered by some to be a weed in lawns, but in many other situations is a desirable source of fodder, honey and soil nitrogen.
A short list of some plants that often are considered to be weeds follows:
Amaranth – ("pigweed") annual with copious long-lasting seeds, also a highly edible and resilient food source
Bermuda grass – perennial, spreading by runners, rhizomes and seeds.
Bindweed
Broadleaf plantain – perennial, spreads by seeds that persist in the soil for many years
Burdock – biennial
Common lambsquarters – annual
Cogongrass - Imperata cylindrica - One of the most damaging pest weeds in the world, infesting vast areas in the tropics.
Creeping charlie – perennial, fast-spreading plants with long creeping stems
Dandelion – perennial, wind-spread, fast-growing, and drought-tolerant
Goldenrod – perennial
Japanese knotweed
Kudzu – perennial
Leafy spurge – perennial, with underground stems
Milk thistle – annual or biennial
Poison ivy – perennial
Ragweed – annual
Sorrel – annual or perennial
Striga
St. John's wort – perennial
Sumac – woody perennial
Tree of heaven – woody perennial
Wild carrot – biennial
Wood sorrel – perennial
Yellow nutsedge – perennial
Many invasive weeds were introduced deliberately in the first place, and may have not been considered nuisances at the time, but rather beneficial.
== Weed control ==
Weed control encompasses a range of methods used by humans to stop, reduce or prevent the growth and reproduction of weeds within agricultural or other managed environments. Some weed control is preventative, implementing protocols to stop weeds from invading new areas. Cultural weed control involves shaping the managed environment to make it less favorable for weeds. Once weeds are present in an area, a wide variety of means to destroy the weeds and their seeds can be employed. Since weeds are highly adaptable, relying on a single method to control weeds soon results in the invasion or adaptation of weeds that are not susceptible. Integrated pest management as it applies to weeds refers to a plan of controlling weeds that integrates multiple methods of weed control and prevention.
Methods of preventative weed control include cleaning equipment, stopping existing weeds in nearby areas from producing seed, and avoiding seed or manure that could be contaminated with weeds. A wide variety of cultural weed control methods are used, including cover cropping, crop rotation, selecting the most competitive cultivars of crops, mulching, planting with optimal density, and intercropping.
Mechanical methods of weed control involve physically cutting, uprooting, or otherwise destroying weeds. On small farms, hand weeding is the dominant means of weed control, but as larger farms dominate agriculture, this method becomes less feasible. On many operations, however, some hand-weeding may be an unavoidable component of weed control. Tillage, mowing, and burning are common examples of mechanical weed control on larger scales. New technology increases the range of mechanical weed control options. One newly emerging form of mechanical weed control uses electricity to kill weeds.
Mechanical weed control has been increasingly replaced by the use of herbicides. The reliance on herbicides has resulted in the rapid evolution of herbicide resistance in weeds, making previously effective herbicide treatments useless for the control of weeds. In particular, glyphosate, which was once considered a revolutionary breakthrough in weed control, was relied upon heavily when it was first introduced to agriculture, resulting in rapid emergence of resistance. As of 2023, 58 weed species have developed resistance to glyphosate.
Herbicide resistance in weeds has rapidly developed into new, increasingly challenging forms as the plants continually evolve. Non-target site resistance, or NTSR, is particularly difficult to counteract, since it may confer resistance to multiple herbicides at once, including herbicides the plants' ancestors were never exposed to. Various methods of adjusting herbicide application to avoid resistance, such as rotating herbicides used and tank mixing herbicides, have all been questioned in terms of their efficacy for preventing resistance from arising.
Understanding the habit of weeds is important for non-chemical methods of weed control, such as plowing, surface scuffling, promotion of more beneficial cover crops, and prevention of seed accumulation in fields. For example, amaranth is an edible plant that is considered a weed by mainstream modern agriculture. It produces copious seeds (up to 1 million per plant) that last many years, and is an early-emergent fast grower. Those seeking to control amaranth quote the mantra "This year's seeds become next year's weeds!". However, another view of amaranth values the plant as a resilient food source.
Some people have appreciated weeds for their tenacity, their wildness and even the work and connection to nature they provide. As Christopher Lloyd wrote in The Well-Tempered Garden:
Many gardeners will agree that hand-weeding is not the terrible drudgery that it is often made out to be. Some people find in it a kind of soothing monotony. It leaves their minds free to develop the plot for their next novel or to perfect the brilliant repartee with which they should have encountered a relative's latest example of unreasonableness.
In the United Kingdom it is illegal under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 to plant or allow to grow certain plants in the wild.
=== Under climate change ===
As anthropogenic climate change increases temperatures and atmospheric carbon dioxide, many weeds are expected to become harder to control and to expand their ranges, at the expense of less "weedy" species. For example, kudzu, the infamous invasive vine found throughout the Southeastern United States, is expected to spread northward due to climate change. Increased competitive strength of agricultural weeds in future climate conditions threaten future ability to grow crops. Existing weed management practices will likely fail under future changes in climate conditions, meaning new agricultural techniques will be needed for global food security. Suggested techniques are holistic, transitioning away from reliance on herbicide, and include aggressive adaptation of agroforestry and use of allelopathic crop residues to suppress weeds.
== See also ==
== References ==
== External links ==
IUCN Invasive Species Specialist Group
New Mexico State University Weeds Page (includes identification tool) Archived 2023-03-14 at the Wayback Machine
New Mexico State University Department of Entomology Plant Pathology and Weed Science
Global Invasive Species Database Archived 2010-11-05 at the Wayback Machine
"Volunteer Plant" definition Archived 2020-08-10 at the Wayback Machine
Lucid Multi-access key to invasive terrestrial plants in Europe (140 species, 41 characters)
Lucid multi-access key: Weeds of Australia Identification Tool. Queensland Government. (1021 species, 55 characters)

Plant pathology or phytopathology is the scientific study of plant diseases caused by pathogens (infectious organisms) and environmental conditions (physiological factors). Plant pathology involves the study of pathogen identification, disease etiology, disease cycles, economic impact, plant disease epidemiology, plant disease resistance, how plant diseases affect humans and animals, pathosystem genetics, and management of plant diseases.
== Plant pathogenicity ==
Plant pathogens, organisms that cause infectious plant diseases, include fungi, oomycetes, bacteria, viruses, viroids, virus-like organisms, phytoplasmas, protozoa, nematodes and parasitic plants.
In most plant pathosystems, virulence depends on hydrolases and enzymes that degrade the cell wall. The vast majority of these act on pectins (for example, pectinesterase, pectate lyase, and pectinases). For microbes, the cell wall polysaccharides are both a food source and a barrier to be overcome. Many pathogens grow opportunistically when the host breaks down its own cell walls, most often during fruit ripening. Unlike human and animal pathology, plant pathology usually focuses on a single causal organism; however, some plant diseases have been shown to be interactions between multiple pathogens.
To colonize a plant, pathogens have specific pathogenicity factors, of five main types: uses of cell wall–degrading enzymes, toxins, effector proteins, phytohormones, and exopolysaccharides.
Cell wall-degrading enzymes: These are used to break down the plant cell wall in order to release the nutrients inside and include esterases, glycosyl hydrolases, lyases and oxidoreductases.
Toxins: These can be non-host-specific, which damage all plants, or host-specific, which cause damage only on a host plant.
Effector proteins: These can be secreted by pathogens such as bacteria, fungi, and oomycetes into the extracellular environment or directly into the host cell, often via the Type three secretion system. Some effectors are known to suppress host immune processes. This can include reducing or inhibiting the plant's internal signaling mechanisms or reduction of phytochemicals production.
Phytohormones are chemicals used by plants for signaling; pathogens can produce these to modify plant growth to their own advantage.
Exopolysaccharides are mostly small chains of sugars that help pathogens to adhere to a plant's surface, enabling them to begin the process of infection.
== Physiological plant disorders ==
Some abiotic disorders can be confused with pathogen-induced disorders. Abiotic causes include natural processes such as drought, frost, snow and hail; flooding and poor drainage; nutrient deficiency; deposition of mineral salts such as sodium chloride and gypsum; windburn and breakage by storms; and wildfires.
== Epidemiology ==
Epidemiology is the study of factors affecting the outbreak and spread of infectious diseases.
A disease triangle describes the basic factors required for plant diseases. These are the host plant, the pathogen, and the environment. Any one of these can be modified to control a disease.
== Disease resistance ==
Plant disease resistance is the ability of a plant to prevent and terminate infections from plant pathogens. Structures that help plants prevent pathogens from entering are the cuticular layer, cell walls, and stomata guard cells. Once pathogens have overcome these barriers, plant receptors initiate signaling pathways to create molecules to compete against the foreign molecules. These pathways are influenced and triggered by genes within the host plant and can be manipulated by genetic breeding to create resistant varieties.
== Management ==
=== Detection ===
Ancient methods of leaf examination and breaking open plant material by hand are now augmented by newer technologies. These include molecular pathology assays such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR), RT-PCR and loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP). Although PCR can detect multiple molecular targets in a single solution there are limits. Bertolini et al. 2001, Ito et al. 2002, and Ragozzino et al. 2004 developed PCR methods for multiplexing six or seven plant pathogen molecular products and Persson et al. 2005 for multiplexing four with RT-PCR. More extensive molecular diagnosis requires PCR arrays. The primary detection method used worldwide is enzyme linked immunosorbent assay.
=== Biological ===
Crop rotation is a traditional and sometimes effective means of preventing a parasitic population from becoming well-established. For example, protection against infection by Agrobacterium tumefaciens, which causes gall diseases in many plants, by dipping cuttings in suspensions of Agrobacterium radiobacter before inserting them in the ground to take root.
== History ==
Plant pathology has developed from antiquity, starting with Theophrastus in the ancient era, but scientific study began in the Early Modern period with the invention of the microscope, and developed in the 19th century.
== Notable people in plant pathology ==
George Washington Carver
Anton de Bary
Erwin Frink Smith
Agnes Robertson Arber
Harold Henry Flor
== See also ==
== References ==
== External links ==

Soil fertility refers to the ability of soil to sustain agricultural plant growth, i.e. to provide plant habitat and result in sustained and consistent yields of high quality (see also soil health). A fertile soil has the following properties:
The ability to supply essential plant nutrients and water in adequate amounts and proportions for plant growth and reproduction; and
The absence of toxic substances which may inhibit plant growth e.g. Fe2+ which leads to nutrient toxicity.
The following properties contribute to soil fertility in most situations:
Sufficient soil depth for adequate root growth and water retention;
Good internal drainage, allowing sufficient soil aeration for optimal root growth (although some plants, such as rice, tolerate waterlogging);
Topsoil or horizon O is with sufficient soil organic matter for healthy soil structure and soil moisture retention;
Soil pH in the range 5.5 to 7.0 (suitable for most plants but some prefer or tolerate more acid or alkaline conditions);
Adequate concentrations of essential plant nutrients in plant-available forms;
Presence of a range of microorganisms that support plant growth.
In lands used for agriculture and other human activities, maintenance of soil fertility typically requires the use of soil conservation practices. This is because soil erosion and other forms of soil degradation generally result in a decline in soil quality with respect to one or more of the aspects indicated above.
Soil fertility and quality of land have been impacted by the effects of colonialism and slavery both in the U.S. and globally. The introduction of harmful land practices such as intensive and non-prescribed burnings and deforestation by colonists created long-lasting negative results to the environment. Also, the rise of intensive farming and intensive sylviculture contributed to the collapse of soil quality in developed countries.
Soil fertility and depletion have different origins and consequences in various parts of the world. The intentional creation of dark earth in the Amazon promoted the tight relationship between indigenous communities and their land during Pre-Columbian times and are still searched as areas of high fertility. In African and Middle Eastern regions, humans and the environment are also altered due to soil depletion.
== Soil fertilization ==
Bioavailable phosphorus (available to soil life) is the element in soil that is most often lacking, in particular in humid tropical soils. Nitrogen and potassium are also needed in substantial amounts. For this reason these three elements are always identified on a commercial fertilizer analysis. For example, a 10-10-15 fertilizer has 10 percent nitrogen, 10 percent available phosphorus (P2O5) and 15 percent water-soluble potassium (K2O). Sulfur is the fourth element that may be identified in a commercial analysis—e.g. 21-0-0-24 which would contain 21% nitrogen and 24% sulfate.
Inorganic fertilizers are generally less labour intensive and have higher concentrations of nutrients than organic fertilizers. Also, since nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium generally must be in the inorganic forms to be taken up by plants, inorganic fertilizers are generally immediately bioavailable to plants without modification. However, studies suggest that chemical fertilizers have adverse health impacts on humans including the development of chronic disease from the toxins. As for the environment, over-reliance on inorganic fertilizers disrupts the natural nutrient balance in the soil, resulting in lower soil quality, loss of organic matter, and higher chances for erosion in the soil.
Additionally, the water-soluble nitrate nitrogen in inorganic fertilizers does not provide for the long-term needs of the plant and creates water pollution. Slow-release fertilizers may reduce leaching loss of nutrients and may make the nutrients that they provide available over a longer period of time.
Soil fertility is a complex process that involves the constant cycling of nutrients between organic and inorganic forms. As plant material and animal wastes are decomposed by micro-organisms, they release inorganic nutrients to the soil solution, a process referred to as mineralization. Those nutrients may then undergo further transformations which may be aided or enabled by soil micro-organisms. Like plants, many micro-organisms require or preferentially use inorganic forms of nitrogen, phosphorus or potassium and will compete with plants for these nutrients, tying up the nutrients in microbial biomass, a process often called immobilization. The balance between immobilization and mineralization processes depends on the balance and availability of major nutrients and organic carbon to soil microorganisms. Natural processes such as lightning strikes may fix atmospheric nitrogen by converting it to nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2). In soil, nitrogen fixation is performed by free-living and symbiotic bacteria. Denitrification occurs generally under anaerobic conditions (e.g. flooding, waterlogging, particulate organic matter, soil aggregates) in the presence of denitrifying bacteria, but it may also occur in aerobic environments where oxygen concentration is fluctuating and reduced carbon is available. Nutrient cations, including potassium and many micronutrients, are held in relatively strong electrostatic interaction bonds with the negatively charged portions of the soil (clay, humus) in a process known as cation exchange which has a prominent influence on soil fertility.
Phosphorus is a primary factor of soil fertility as it is essential for cell division and plant development, especially in seedlings and young plants. However, phosphorus is becoming increasingly harder to find and its reserves are starting to be depleted due to its excessive use as a fertilizer. The widespread use of phosphorus in fertilizers has led to pollution and eutrophication. The term peak phosphorus has been coined, due to the limited occurrence of rock phosphate in the world, estimating that U.S. peak phosphorus occurred in 1988 and for the world in 1989.
A wide variety of materials have been described as soil conditioners due to their ability to improve soil quality, including biochar, offering multiple soil health benefits.
Food waste compost was found to have better soil improvement than manure based compost.
== Light and CO2 limitations ==
Photosynthesis is the process whereby plants use light energy to drive chemical reactions which convert CO2 into sugars. As such, all plants require access to both light and carbon dioxide to produce energy, grow and reproduce.
While typically limited by nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium, low levels of carbon dioxide can also act as a limiting factor on plant growth. Peer-reviewed and published scientific studies have shown that increasing CO2 is highly effective at promoting plant growth up to levels over 300 ppm. Further increases in CO2 can, to a very small degree, continue to increase net photosynthetic output.
== Soil depletion ==
Soil depletion occurs when the components which contribute to fertility are removed and not replaced, and the conditions which support soil's fertility are not maintained. This leads to poor crop yields, now becoming a global problem. In agriculture, soil depletion can be due to excessively intensive cultivation and inadequate soil management. Depletion may occur through a variety of other effects, including over-tillage (which damages soil structure), overuse of nutrient inputs which leads to mining of the soil nutrient bank, and salinization of soil.
=== Colonial impacts on soil depletion ===
Soil fertility can be severely challenged when land-use changes rapidly. For example, in Colonial New England, colonists made a number of decisions that depleted the soils, including: allowing herd animals to wander freely, not replenishing soils with manure, and a sequence of events that led to erosion. William Cronon wrote that "...the long-term effect was to put those soils in jeopardy. The removal of the forest, the increase in destructive floods, the soil compaction and close-cropping wrought by grazing animals, ploughing—all served to increase erosion." Cronon continues, explaining, "Where mowing was unnecessary and grazing among living trees was possible, settlers saved labor by simply burning the forest undergrowth...and turning loose their cattle...In at least one ill-favored area, the inhabitants of neighboring towns burned so frequently and graze so intensively that...the timber was greatly injured, and the land became hard to subdue...In the long run, cattle tended to encourage the growth of woody, thorn-bearing plants which they could not eat and which, once established, were very difficult to remove". These practices were methods of simplifying labor for colonial settlers in new lands when they were not familiar with traditional Indigenous agricultural methods. Those Indigenous communities were not consulted but rather forced out of their homelands so European settlers could commodify their resources. The practice of intensive land burning and turning loose cattle ruined soil fertility and prohibited sustainable crop growth.
While colonists utilized fire to clear land, certain prescribed burning practices are common and valuable to increase biodiversity and in turn, benefit soil fertility. However, without consideration of the intensity, seasonality, and frequency of the burns, the conservation of biodiversity and the overall health of the soil can be negatively impacted by fire.
In addition to soil erosion through using too much fire, colonial agriculture also resulted in topsoil depletion. Topsoil depletion occurs when the nutrient-rich organic topsoil, which takes hundreds to thousands of years to build up under natural conditions, is eroded or depleted of its original organic material. The Dust Bowl in the Great Plains of North America is a great example of this with about one-half of the original topsoil of the Great Plains having disappeared since the beginning of agricultural production there in the 1880s. Outside of the context of colonialism, many past civilizations' collapses can be attributed to topsoil depletion.
=== Soil depletion and enslavement ===
As historian David Silkenat explains, the goals of Southern plantation and slave owners, instead of measuring productivity based on outputs per acre, were to maximize the amount of labor that could be extracted from the enslaved workforce. The landscape was seen as disposable, and the African slaves were seen as expendable. Once these Southern farmers forced slaves to engage in mass deforestation, they would discard the land and move towards more fertile prospects. The forced slave practices created extensive destruction on the land. The environmental impact included draining swamps, clearing forests for monocropping and fuel steamships, and introducing invasive species, all leading to fragile ecosystems. In the aftermath, these ecosystems left hillsides eroded, rivers clogged with sterile soil, and extinction of native species. Silkenat summarizes this phenomenon of the relationship between enslavement and soil, "Although typically treated separately, slavery and the environment naturally intersect in complex and powerful ways, leaving lasting effects from the period of emancipation through modern-day reckonings with racial justice…the land too fell victim to the slave owner's lash".
=== Global Soil Depletion ===
One of the most widespread occurrences of soil depletion as of 2008 is in tropical zones where nutrient content of soils is low. The depletion of soil has affected the state of plant life and crops in agriculture in many countries. In the Middle East for example, many countries find it difficult to grow produce because of drought, lack of soil (soil erosion), and lack of irrigation. The Middle East has three countries that indicate a decline in crop production, the highest rates of productivity decline being found in hilly and dryland areas.
Many countries in Africa also undergo a depletion of fertile soil, in particular in sub-Saharan Africa (Sahel) under high population pressure. In regions of arid climate like Sudan and the countries that make up the Sahara Desert, droughts and soil degradation are common, aggravated by badly-adapted agricultural practices. Cash crops such as teas, maize, and beans require a high variety and quantity of nutrients in order to grow healthy and sustain population growth. Soil fertility has declined in the farming regions of Africa and the use of artificial and natural fertilizers has been used to regain the nutrients of ground soil.
== Dark Earths ==
=== South America ===
The details of Indigenous societies prior to European colonization in 1492 within the Amazonian regions of South America, particularly the size of the communities and the depth of interactions with the environment, are continually debated. Central to the debate is the influence of Dark Earth. Dark Earth is a type of soil found in the Amazon that has a darker color, higher organic carbon content, and higher fertility than soil in other regions of South America, which makes it highly coveted even today. Dark Earth deposits have been found, through ethnographic and archaeological studies, to have been created through ancient Indigenous practices by intentional soil management.
Ethnoarchaeologist Morgan Schmidt outlines how this carbon-rich soil was intentionally created by communities in the Amazon. While Dark Earth, and other anthropic soils, can be found all throughout the world, Amazonian Dark Earth is particularly significant because "it contrasts too sharply with the especially poor fertility of typical highly weathered tropical upland soils in the Amazon". There is much evidence to suggest that the development of ancient agricultural societies in the Amazon was strongly influenced by the formation of Dark Earth. As a result, Amazonian societies benefitted from the dark earth in terms of agricultural success and enhanced food production. Soil analyses have been completed on the modern and ancient Kuikuro Indigenous Territory in the Upper Xingu River basin in southeastern Amazonia through archaeological and ethnographic research to determine the human relation to the soil. The "results demonstrate the intentional creation of dark earth, highlighting how Indigenous knowledge can provide strategies for sustainable rainforest management". Present-day addition of orgnic waste products (fish and manioc refuses), ashes and charcoal as mounds up to ~50 to 60 cm above the original ground surface by Kuikuro Amerindians was hypothesized to be common practice in Pre-Columbian agriculture. By transforming charcoal in black carbon, a source of highly stable humus, the grinding and mixing activity of the peregrine pantropical earthworm Pontoscolex corethrurus adds a natural biological phenomenon to our knowledge of the formation of the fertile Amazonian Dark Earths.
=== Africa ===
In Egypt, earthworms of the Nile River Valley contributed to the significant fertility of the soils. As a result, Cleopatra declared the earthworm a sacred animal to be revered and protected by all her subjects. Egyptians were not allowed to remove so much as a single worm from the land of Egypt, and even farmers were not allowed to touch an earthworm for fear of offending the god of
fertility. In Ghana and Liberia, it is a long-standing practice to combine different types of waste to create fertile soil that is referred to as African Dark Earths. This soil contains high concentrations of calcium, phosphorus, and carbon.
=== North America and Eurasia ===
Also called Mollisols, Chernozems or Black Soils, with a number of variants, Dark Earths are widespread in North America and in a mid-latitude stretch extending over a large part of Eurasia. The formation of these fertile carbon- and nutrient-rich zonal soils was longtime attributed to dry continental climate conditions and steppe or prairie vegetation (according to biomes) until it became admitted that past human activities (deposition of domestic and occupational wastes, charred residues, biomass ashes, burning, fertilisation) were a driving factor of Dark Earth formation, and that not only in the tropics. The presence in the A horizon of sand- and silt-size char particles of both wood and herb origin attests for previously forested environments which humans destroyed by fire for the sake of agriculture or hunting of large herbivores after the Last Glacial Period. Whether charcoal was deliberately managed by humans as a soil conditioner and whether earthworm grinding and mixing of charcoal contributed to the formation of temperate Dark Earths is still a matter of conjecture, although it has been claimed that Prehistoric agriculture favored earthworm abundance for Chernozem formation.
== Humans and soil ==
Albert Howard is credited as the first Westerner to publish Native techniques of sustainable agriculture. As noted by Howard in 1945, "In all future studies of disease we must, therefore, always begin with the soil. This must be gotten into good condition first of all and then the reaction of the soil, the plant, animal, and man observed. Many diseases will then automatically disappear... Soil fertility is the basis of the public health system of the future...". Howard connects the health crises of crops to the impacts of livestock and human health, ultimately spreading the message that humans must respect and restore the soil for the benefit of the human and non-human world. He continues that industrial agriculture disrupts the delicate balance of nature and irrevocably robs the soil of its fertility.
== Irrigation effects ==
Irrigation is a process by which crops are watered by man-made means, such as bringing in water from pipes, canals, or sprinklers. Irrigation is used when the natural rainfall patterns of a region are not sustainable enough to maintain crops. Ancient civilizations heavily relied on irrigation and today about 18% of the world's cropland is irrigated. The quality of irrigation water is very important to maintain soil fertility and tilth, and for using more soil depth by the plants. When soil is irrigated with high alkaline water, unwanted sodium salts build up in the soil which would make soil draining capacity very poor. So plant roots cannot penetrate deep into the soil for optimum growth in Alkali soils. When soil is irrigated with low pH (acidic) water, the useful salts (Ca, Mg, K, P, S, etc.) are removed by draining water from the acidic soil and in addition plant-unwanted aluminium and manganese salts are dissolved from the soil, impeding plant growth. When soil is irrigated with high salinity water or sufficient water is not draining out from the irrigated soil, the soil would convert into saline soil and lose its fertility. Saline water enhances the turgor pressure or osmotic pressure requirement which impedes the uptake of water and nutrients by the plant roots.
Topsoil loss takes place in alkali soils due to erosion by rainwater surface runoff or drainage as they form colloids (fine mud) in contact with water. Plants absorb water-soluble inorganic salts mostly from the soil for their growth, although some non-neglectable uptake occurs also from rain and aerial spray deposited on the foliage. Soil as such does not lose fertility just by growing crops if weathering of soil minerals compensate for nutrients exported in harvest. However, it can lose its fertility through the accumulation of unwanted and depletion of wanted inorganic salts by improper irrigation and acid rain water. The fertility of many soils which are not suitable for plant growth can be enhanced many times gradually by providing adequate irrigation water of suitable quality and good drainage from the soil.
== Global distribution ==
== See also ==
Arable land
Plaggen soil
Shifting cultivation
Soil contamination
Soil life
Terra preta
Cation-exchange capacity
== References ==

Drip irrigation or trickle irrigation is a type of micro-irrigation system that has the potential to save water and nutrients by allowing water to drip slowly to the roots of plants, either from above the soil surface or buried below the surface. The goal is to place water directly into the root zone and minimize evaporation. Drip irrigation systems distribute water through a network of valves, pipes, tubing, and emitters. Depending on how well designed, installed, maintained, and operated it is, a drip irrigation system can be more efficient than other types of irrigation systems, such as surface irrigation or sprinkler irrigation. While ancient examples of reduced-evaporation farming have been documented in China, the system that farmers and scientists use today was invented in Israel.
As of 2023, 3% of the world's farmers use drip irrigation, mostly for row crops, greenhouses, vineyards,
== History ==
=== Ancient China ===
Primitive drip irrigation has been used since ancient times. Fan Shengzhi shu, written in China during the first century BCE, describes the use of buried, unglazed clay pots filled with water, sometimes referred to as Ollas, as a means of irrigation.
=== Modern development ===
==== Subsurface pipe ====
Modern drip irrigation began its development in Germany in 1860 when researchers began experimenting with subsurface irrigation using clay pipe to create combination irrigation and drainage systems.
==== Perforated pipe ====
The research was later expanded in the 1920s to include the application of perforated pipe systems.
==== Plastic ====
The usage of plastic to hold and distribute water in drip irrigation was later developed in Australia by Hannis Thill.
==== Plastic emitter, trickle irrigation ====
Usage of a plastic emitter in drip irrigation was developed in Israel by Simcha Blass and his son Yeshayahu. Instead of releasing water through tiny holes easily blocked by tiny particles, water was released through larger and longer passageways by using friction to slow water inside a plastic emitter. The first experimental system of this type was established in 1959 by Blass, who partnered later in 1964 with Kibbutz Hatzerim to create an irrigation company called Netafim. Together, they developed and patented the first practical surface drip irrigation emitter. Modern drip irrigation was invented in Israel in the 1960s. Such irrigation also improved the efficiency of fertilizer use, as well as water. The introduction of this technology was revolutionary according to The Times of Israel, and could save 70% of water usage in the growth of rice.
Goldberg and Shmueli (1970) developed a significant improvement: "in the Arava desert in southern Israel, [Shmueli] demonstrated that a trickle-irrigation system installed on the soil surface worked exceptionally well in producing vegetable crops, even with saline or salt water (Elfving, 1989). The system...was responsible for the greening of formerly unproductive environment".
Replacing sub-surface system with on surface system solved the disadvantage of clogging the subsurface system. Their improvement prevailed: "Drip irrigation is presently the most efficient means to apply water to crops (Pathak et al. 2009; Goyal 2012)... There are two variations of the technology: surface, and subsurface. The most common is surface drip irrigation, first developed in Israel (Goldberg and Shmueli 1970)... Due to the need to improve irrigation efficiency, as a measure toward sustainable use of water resources, there is wide interest in drip irrigation (Scanlon et al. 2012; Steward et al. 2013; Schaible and Aillery 2017). This is highlighted by numerous studies to evaluate its performance for the production of several crops."
Netafim developed technology to specifically water rice. Rice paddies produce 10% of global methane emissions, the equivalent of 400 million cars. This technology was first introduced in Italy, Turkey, and India. Agritech firm N-Drip developed smart drip irrigation for rice paddies. In the TOI article it was reported that N-Drip system led to yield increases of up to 33%, fertilizer reduction of 50%, a drop in greenhouse gases like carbon and methane from 50% to 85%, as well as water savings of 50%.
==== Drip tape ====
In the United States, the first drip tape, called Dew Hose, was developed by Richard Chapin and Jaime Leal-Diaz of Chapin Watermatics in the early 1960s. The evolution of drip tape which made large-scale adoption and use possible was the introduction of T-Tape in 1987 by Plastro Irrigation, that had the first slit outlet and a laminar flow track which later evolved into a turbulent flow regulating flow track. Chapin Watermatics was acquired by Jain Irrigation in 2006 and is housed under its US subsidiary Jain Irrigation Inc, USA.
First introduced in California in the late 1960s, only 5% of irrigated land used this system by 1988. However, by 2010, 40% of irrigated land in California used this system.
==== Trickle ring ====
A trickle ring is a circular device which evenly distributes water around the base of a tree or shrub. Connected to a water supply by a garden hose or tubing adapter fitting, trickle rings may be integrated into an irrigation network which waters many plants at the same time. By regulating the flow of water through the trickle ring, soil can be saturated at a rate which conserves water by minimizing wasteful surface runoff and losses due to evaporation.
== Significance ==
Modern drip irrigation has arguably become the world's most valued innovation in agriculture since the invention in the 1930s of the impact sprinkler, which offered the first practical alternative to surface irrigation.
== Current developments ==
Careful study of all the relevant factors like land topography, soil, water, crop and agro-climatic conditions are needed to determine the most suitable drip irrigation system and components to be used in a specific installation.
=== Micro-spray heads ===
Drip irrigation may also use devices called micro-spray heads, which spray water in a small area, instead of dripping emitters. These are generally used on tree and vine crops with wider root zones.
=== Subsurface drip irrigation ===
Subsurface drip irrigation (SDI) uses permanently or temporarily buried dripperline or drip tape located at or below the plant roots. It is becoming popular for row crop irrigation, especially in areas where water supplies are limited, or recycled water is used for irrigation.
== Global reach and market leaders ==
As of 2012, China and India were the fastest expanding countries in the field of drip- or other micro-irrigation, while worldwide well over ten million hectares used these technologies. Still, this amounted to less than 4 percent of the world's irrigated land. That year, Israel's Netafim was the global market leader (a position it maintained in 2018), with India's Jain Irrigation being the second-biggest micro-irrigation company. In 2017 Rivulis bought Eurodrip and became the world's second largest irrigation systems manufacturer.
== Components and operation ==
Components used in drip irrigation (listed in order from water source) include:
Pump or pressurized water supplying equipment
Water filters or Filtration Systems, Sand Separator (optional-if required), Dosing Pump & Injectors: sand separator, Venturi Assembly - Fertilizer Injection Equipment, Fertilizer Tanks & Fertigation pumps / Fertigation systems and Chemigation system (optional)
Backwash and filter system controller
Pressure control valve (pressure regulator)
Main Pipe lines before lateral distribution (main and sub-main larger diameter PVC or HDPE pipe, pipe fittings)
Hand-operated, electronic, or hydraulic control valves and safety valves
Smaller diameter polyethylene tube (often called "laterals")
Poly fittings and accessories (to make connections)
Emitting devices at plants (emitter or dripper, micro spray head, inline dripper or inline drip tube)
In drip irrigation systems, pump and valves may be manually or automatically operated by a smart controller.
Most large drip irrigation systems employ some type of filter to prevent clogging of the small emitter flow path by small waterborne particles. New technologies are now being offered that minimize clogging. Some residential systems are installed without additional filters since potable water is already filtered at the water treatment plant. Virtually all drip irrigation equipment manufacturers recommend that filters be employed and generally will not honor warranties unless this is done. Last line filters just before the final delivery pipe are strongly recommended in addition to any other filtration system due to fine particle settlement and accidental insertion of particles in the intermediate lines.
Drip and subsurface drip irrigation is used almost exclusively when using recycled municipal wastewater. Regulations typically do not permit spraying water through the air that has not been fully treated to potable water standards.
Because of the way the water is applied in a drip system, traditional surface applications of timed-release fertilizer are sometimes ineffective, so drip systems often mix liquid fertilizer with the irrigation water. This is called fertigation; fertigation and chemigation (application of pesticides and other chemicals to periodically clean out the system, such as chlorine or sulfuric acid) use chemical injectors such as diaphragm pumps, piston pumps, or aspirators. The chemicals may be added constantly whenever the system is irrigating or at intervals. Fertilizer savings of up to 95% are being reported from recent university field tests using drip fertigation and slow water delivery as compared to timed-release and irrigation by micro spray heads.
Properly designed, installed, and managed, drip irrigation may help achieve water conservation by reducing evaporation and deep drainage when compared to other types of irrigation such as flood or overhead sprinklers since water can be more precisely applied to the plant roots. In addition, drip can eliminate many diseases that are spread through water contact with the foliage. Finally, in regions where water supplies are severely limited, there may be no actual water savings, but rather simply an increase in production while using the same amount of water as before. In very arid regions or on sandy soils, the preferred method is to apply the irrigation water as slowly as possible.
Pulsed irrigation is sometimes used to decrease the amount of water delivered to the plant at any one time, thus reducing runoff or deep percolation. Pulsed systems are typically expensive and require extensive maintenance. Therefore, the latest efforts by emitter manufacturers are focused on developing new technologies that deliver irrigation water at ultra-low flow rates, i.e. less than 1.0 L (2.1 US pints; 1.8 imperial pints) per hour. Slow-and-even delivery further improves water use efficiency without incurring the expense and complexity of pulsed delivery equipment.
An emitting pipe is a type of drip irrigation tubing with emitters pre-installed at the factory with specific distance and flow per hour as per crop distance.
An emitter restricts water flow passage through it, thus creating head loss required (to the extent of atmospheric pressure) to emit water in the form of droplets. This head loss is achieved by friction/turbulence within the emitter.
== Advantages and disadvantages ==
The advantages of drip irrigation are:
Fertilizer and nutrient loss is minimized due to a localized application and reduced leaching.
Water application efficiency is high if managed correctly.
Field leveling is not necessary.
Fields with irregular shapes are easily accommodated.
Recycled non-potable water can be safely used.
Moisture within the root zone can be maintained at field capacity.
Soil type plays a less important role in the frequency of irrigation.
Soil erosion is lessened.
Weed growth is lessened.
Water distribution is highly uniform, controlled by the output of each nozzle.
Labour cost is less than other irrigation methods.
Variation in supply can be regulated by regulating the valves and drippers.
Fertigation can easily be included with minimal waste of fertilizers.
Foliage remains dry, reducing the risk of disease.
Usually operated at lower pressure than other types of pressurized irrigation, reducing energy costs.
The disadvantages of drip irrigation are:
Initial cost can be more than overhead systems. Ongoing capital costs related to replacing and maintaining the tubes can exceed water savings if the system improperly designed and set up. Drip irrigation may also be more labor intensive, especially if there is extensive crop rotation necessitating seasonal replacement of drip tubing to accommodate different row spacings.
The sun can affect the tubes used for drip irrigation, shortening their lifespan. (See Polymer degradation);
The risks of degrading plastic affecting the soil content and food crops. With many types of plastic, when the sun degrades the plastic, causing it to become brittle, the estrogenic chemicals (that is, chemicals replicating female hormones) which would cause the plastic to retain flexibility have been released into the surrounding environment.
If the water is not properly filtered and the equipment not properly maintained, it can result in clogging or bioclogging.
For subsurface drip the irrigator cannot see the water that is applied. This may lead to the farmer either applying too much water (low efficiency) or an insufficient amount of water, this is particularly common for those with less experience with drip irrigation.
Drip irrigation might be unsatisfactory if herbicides or top dressed fertilizers need sprinkler irrigation for activation.
Drip tape causes extra cleanup costs after harvest. Users need to plan for drip tape winding, disposal, recycling or reuse.
Waste of water, time and harvest, if not installed properly. These systems require careful study of all the relevant factors like land topography, soil, water, crop and agro-climatic conditions, and suitability of drip irrigation system and its components.
In lighter soils subsurface drip may be unable to wet the soil surface for germination. Requires careful consideration of the installation depth.
Most drip systems are designed for high efficiency, meaning little or no leaching fraction. Without sufficient leaching, salts applied with the irrigation water may build up in the root zone, usually at the edge of the wetting pattern. On the other hand, drip irrigation avoids the high capillary potential of traditional surface-applied irrigation, which can draw salt deposits up from deposits below.
The PVC pipes often suffer from rodent damage, requiring replacement of the entire tube and increasing expenses.
Drip irrigation systems cannot be used for damage control by night frosts (like in the case of sprinkler irrigation systems)
== Drip tape ==
Drip tape is a type of thin-walled dripper line used in drip irrigation. The first drip tape was known as "Dew Hose".
Drip tape duct tape is made of polyethylene and sold flat on reels. The wall thickness typically ranges from 0.1 to 0.6 mm (4 to 25 mils). Thicker-walled tapes are commonly used for permanent subsurface drip irrigation, and thinner-walled tapes for temporary throw-away systems in high-value crops.
Water exits from tape through emitters or drippers. The typical emitter spacing ranges from 150 to 610 mm (6 to 24 inches). In some products, the emitters are manufactured simultaneously with the tape and formed as part of the product. In others, the emitters are manufactured separately and installed during production.
Some products are not tape but a thin-walled dripper line, but in popular parlance, both types of products are called tapes. Typical tape diameters are 16 mm (5⁄8 in), 22 mm (7⁄8 in), and 35 mm (1+3⁄8 in), with the larger diameters more commonly used on permanent installations with longer runs.
Drip tape is a recyclable material and can be recycled into viable plastic resins for reuse in the plastics manufacturing industry.
== Uses ==
Drip irrigation is used in farms, commercial greenhouses, and residential gardens. Drip irrigation is adopted extensively in areas of acute water scarcity and especially for crops and trees such as coconuts, containerized landscape trees, grapes, bananas, ber, eggplant, citrus, strawberries, sugarcane, cotton, maize, and tomatoes.
Drip irrigation kits for home gardens are increasingly popular for homeowners and consist of a timer, hose, and emitter. Hoses that are 4 mm (0.16 in) in diameter are used to irrigate flower pots.
== See also ==
Alkali soils
Cation-exchange capacity
Environmental impact of irrigation
Index of soil-related articles
Phosphogypsum
Residual sodium carbonate index
Soil pH
Soil salinity control
== References ==
== Further reading ==
Irrigation, 5th Edition, Muhammad Irfan Khan Yousafzai, Claude H. Pair, editor, published by the Irrigation Association, 1983
Trickle Irrigation for Crop Production, F. S. Nakayama and D. A. Bucks, editors, published by Elsevier, 1986, ISBN 978-0-444-42615-4
S. Blass, Water in Strife and Action (Hebrew), published by Massada limited, Israel, 1973
Maintenance Manual, published by Jain Irrigation Systems, 1989
Drip and Micro Irrigation Design and Management for Trees, Vines, and Field Crops, 5th Edition, by Charles M. Burt and Stuart W. Styles, published by the Irrigation Training and Research Center (ITRC), Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo, CA 93407–0721. www.itrc.org., 2016

Sorghum bicolor, commonly called sorghum () and also known as broomcorn, great millet, Indian millet, Guinea corn, jowar, or milo, is a species in the grass genus Sorghum. It is typically an annual, but some cultivars are perennial. It grows in clumps that may reach over 4 metres (13 ft) high. The grain is 2 to 4 millimetres (0.08 to 0.2 in) in diameter.
The species originated and was domesticated in Sudan. Native to Africa and the Indian subcontinent, it is cultivated in tropical and subtropical regions for its grain. It is the world's fifth-most important cereal crop. The grain is used as food by humans, while the plant is used for animal feed and ethanol production.
== Description ==
Sorghum is a large stout grass that grows up to 2.4 metres (8 ft) tall. It has large bushy flowerheads or panicles that provide an edible starchy grain with up to 3,000 seeds in each flowerhead. It grows in warm climates worldwide for food and forage. Sorghum is native to Africa and to the Indian Subcontinent, with many cultivated forms. Most production uses annual cultivars, but some wild species of Sorghum are perennial; the Land Institute is attempting to develop a perennial cultivar for "repeated, sufficient grain harvests without resowing". The name sorghum derives from Italian sorgo, which in turn most likely comes from 12th century Medieval Latin surgum or suricum. This in turn may be from Latin syricum, meaning "[grass] of Syria".
Types include milo, durra, imphee, hegari, kaffir, feterita, shallu, and kaoliang.
== Evolution ==
=== Phylogeny ===
Sorghum is closely related to maize and the millets within the PACMAD clade of grasses, and more distantly to the cereals of the BOP clade such as wheat and barley.
== History ==
=== Domestication ===
S. bicolor was domesticated from its wild ancestor more than 5,000 years ago in Eastern Sudan in the area of the Rivers Atbara and Gash. It has been found at an archaeological site near Kassala in eastern Sudan, dating from 3500 to 3000 BCE, and is associated with the Neolithic Butana Group culture. Sorghum bread from graves in Predynastic Egypt, some 5,100 years ago, is displayed in the Egyptian Museum, Turin, Italy.
The first species to be domesticated was bicolor; it had tight husks that had to be removed forcibly. Around 4,000 years ago, this spread to the Indian subcontinent; around 3,000 years ago it reached West Africa. Four other species evolved through cultivation to have larger grains and to become free-threshing, making harvests easier and more productive. These were caudatum in the Sahel; durra, most likely in India; guinea in West Africa (later reaching India), and from that race magentiferum that gave rise to the varieties of Southern Africa. Wetter conditions in parts of the Horn of Africa between about 2,500 and 1,000 years ago supported the expansion of sorghum cultivation and contributed to the development of complex agricultural societies such as Aksum.
=== Spread ===
In the Middle Ages, the Arab Agricultural Revolution spread sorghum and other crops from Africa and Asia across the Arab world as far as Al-Andalus in Spain. Sorghum remained the staple food of the medieval kingdom of Alodia and most Sub-Saharan cultures prior to European colonialism.
Tall varieties of sorghum with a high sugar content are called sweet sorghum; these are useful for producing a sugar-rich syrup and as forage. Sweet sorghum was important to the sugar trade in the 19th century. The price of sugar was rising because of decreased production in the British West Indies and more demand for confectionery and fruit preserves, and the United States was actively searching for a sugar plant that could be produced in northern states. The "Chinese sugar-cane", sweet sorghum, was viewed as a plant that would be productive in the West Indies.
== Cultivation ==
=== Agronomy ===
Most varieties of sorghum are drought- and heat-tolerant, nitrogen-efficient, and are grown particularly in arid and semi-arid regions where the grain is one of the staples for poor and rural people. These varieties provide forage in many tropical regions. S. bicolor is a food crop in Africa, Central America, and South Asia, and is the fifth most common cereal crop grown in the world. It is usually grown without fertilizers or other inputs by small-holder farmers in developing countries. They benefit from sorghum's ability to compete effectively with weeds, especially when planted in narrow rows. Sorghum actively suppresses weeds by producing sorgoleone, an alkylresorcinol.
Sorghum grows in a wide range of temperatures. It can tolerate high altitude and toxic soils, and can recover growth after some drought. Optimum growth temperature range is 12–34 °C (54–93 °F), and the growing season lasts for around 115–140 days. It can grow in a wide range of soils, such as heavy clay to sandy soils with the pH tolerance ranging from 5.0 to 8.5. It requires an arable field that has been left fallow for at least two years or where crop rotation with legumes has taken place in the previous year. Diversified 2- or 4-year crop rotation can improve sorghum yield, making it more resilient to inconsistent growth conditions. Nutrients required by sorghum are comparable to other cereal grain crops with nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium needed for growth.
The International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics has improved sorghum using traditional genetic improvement and integrated genetic and natural resources management practices. Some 194 improved cultivars are planted worldwide. In India, increases in sorghum productivity resulting from improved cultivars have freed up 7 million hectares (17 million acres) of land, enabling farmers to diversify into high-income cash crops and boost their livelihoods. Sorghum is used primarily as poultry feed, and also as cattle feed and in brewing.
Insect damage is a major threat to sorghum plants. Over 150 species damage crop plants at different stages of development, resulting in significant biomass loss. Stored sorghum grain is attacked by insect pests such as the lesser grain borer beetle. Sorghum is a host of the parasitic plant Striga hermonthica, purple witchweed that can reduce production. Sorghum is subject to a variety of plant pathogens. The fungus Colletotrichum sublineolum causes anthracnose. The toxic ergot fungus attacks the grain, risking harm to humans and livestock. Sorghum produces chitinases as defensive compounds against fungal diseases. Transgenesis of additional chitinases increases the crop's disease resistance.
=== Genetics and genomics ===
The genome of S. bicolor was sequenced between 2005 and 2007. It is generally considered diploid and contains 20 chromosomes, however, there is evidence to suggest a tetraploid origin for S. bicolor. The genome size is approximately 800 Mbp.
Paterson et al., 2009 provides a genome assembly of 739 megabase. The most commonly used genome database is SorGSD maintained by Luo et al., 2016. A gene expression atlas is available from Shakoor et al., 2014 with 27,577 genes. For molecular breeding (or other purposes) an SNP array has been created by Bekele et al., 2013, a 3K SNP Infinium from Illumina, Inc.
Agrobacterium transformation can be used on sorghum, as shown in a 2018 report of such a transformation system. A 2013 study developed and validated an SNP array for molecular breeding.
== Production ==
In 2023, world production of sorghum was 57 million tonnes, led by the United States with 14% of the total (table). Mexico, Ethiopia, and India were secondary producers.
It is the world's fifth-most important cereal crop after rice, wheat, maize, and barley.
=== International trade ===
In 2013, China began purchasing American sorghum as a complementary livestock feed to its domestically grown maize. It imported around $1 billion worth per year until April 2018, when it imposed retaliatory tariffs as part of a trade war. By 2020, the tariffs had been waived, and trade volumes increased before declining again as China began buying sorghum from other countries. As of 2020, China is the world's largest sorghum importer, importing more than all other countries combined. Mexico also accounts for 7% of global sorghum production.
== Nutrition ==
The grain is edible and nutritious. It can be eaten raw when young and milky, but has to be boiled or ground into flour when mature.
Sorghum grain is 72% carbohydrates including 7% dietary fiber, 11% protein, 3% fat, and 12% water (table). In a reference amount of 100 grams (3.5 oz), sorghum grain supplies 329 calories and rich contents (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of several B vitamins and dietary minerals (table).
In the early stages of plant growth, some sorghum species may contain levels of hydrogen cyanide, hordenine, and nitrates lethal to grazing animals. Plants stressed by drought or heat can also contain toxic levels of cyanide and nitrates at later stages in growth.
== Use ==
=== Food and drink ===
Sorghum is widely used for food and animal fodder. It is also used to make alcoholic beverages. It can be made into couscous, porridge, or flatbreads such as Indian jōḷada roṭṭi or tortillas; and it can be burst in hot oil to make a popcorn smaller than that of maize. Since it does not contain gluten, it can be used in gluten-free diets.
In South Africa, characteristically sour malwa beer is made from sorghum or millet. The process involves souring the mashed grain with lactic acid bacteria, followed by fermenting by the wild yeasts that were on the grain. In China and Taiwan, sorghum is one of the main materials of Kaoliang liquor, a type of the colourless distilled alcoholic drink baijiu. In Uganda, sorghum is an ingredient used in angodic, which is a traditional food of the Karamojong people.
In countries including the US, the stalks of sweet sorghum varieties are crushed in a cane juicer to extract the sweet molasses-like juice. The juice is sold as syrup, and used as a feedstock to make biofuel.
=== Biofuel ===
Sorghum can be used to produce fuel ethanol as an alternative to maize. The energy ratio for the production of ethanol is similar to that of sugarcane, and much higher than that of maize. Extracted carbohydrates can readily be fermented into ethanol because of their simple sugar structure. Residuals contain enough energy to be burned to power the ethanol processing facilities used to produce the fuel. As of 2018, production costs (including price of produce, transport and processing costs) are competitive with maize, while sorghum has a lower nitrogen fertilizer requirement than maize. To turn it into fuel ethanol, sorghum juice is concentrated into syrup for long term storage, then fermented in a batch fermentation process.
The stalk of sweet sorghum varieties, called sorgo or sorgho and taller than those grown for grain, can be used as forage or silage and to produce ethanol.
=== Other uses ===
In Nigeria, the pulverized red leaf-sheaths of sorghum have been used to dye leather, while in Algeria, sorghum has been used to dye wool.
In India, the panicle stalks are used as bristles for brooms.
Sorghum seeds and bagasse have the potential to produce lactic acid via fermentation which can be used to make polylactic acid, a biodegradable thermoplastic resin.
== In human culture ==
In Australia, sorghum is personified as a spirit among the Dagoman people of Northern Territory, as well as being used for food; the local species are S. intrans and S. plumosum.
In Korea, the origin tale "Brother and sister who became the Sun and Moon" is also called "The reason sorghum is red". In the tale, a tiger who is chasing a brother and sister follows them up a rotten rope as they climb into the sky, and become the sun and moon. The rope breaks, and the tiger falls to its death, impaling itself on a sorghum stalk, which becomes red with its blood.
In Northeastern Italy in the early modern period, stalks of fennel were used by Benandanti visionaries, or out-of-body travelers, of the Friuli district to fight off Maledanti, who fought with sticks of sorghum, and were thought to threaten crops and people.
== See also ==
3-Deoxyanthocyanidin
Apigeninidin
List of antioxidants in food
== References ==
== External links ==
Crop Wild Relatives Inventory: information source on where and what to conserve ex-situ, regarding Sorghum genepool
Taxon: Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench subsp. bicolor – information from National Plant Germplasm System/GRIN
Sorghum bicolor in West African plants – A Photo Guide.

Sugarcane or sugar cane is a species of tall, perennial grass (in the genus Saccharum, tribe Andropogoneae) that is used for sugar production. The plants are 2–7 m (6–20 ft) tall with stout, jointed, fibrous stalks that are rich in sucrose, which accumulates in the stalk internodes. Sugarcanes belong to the grass family, Poaceae, an economically important flowering plant family that includes maize, wheat, rice, and sorghum, and many forage crops. It is native to New Guinea.
Sugarcane was an ancient crop of the Austronesian and Papuan people. The best evidence available today points to the New Guinea area as the site of the original domestication of Saccharum officinarum. It was introduced to Polynesia, Island Melanesia, and Madagascar in prehistoric times via Austronesian sailors. It was also introduced by Austronesian sailors to India and then to Southern China by 500 BC, via trade. The Persians and Greeks found "that reeds in India yield honey without bees", as said by Strabo, between the sixth and fourth centuries BC. They adopted and then spread sugarcane agriculture. By the eighth century, sugar was considered a luxurious and expensive spice from India, and merchant trading spread its use across the Mediterranean and North Africa. In the 18th century, sugarcane plantations began in the Caribbean, South American, Indian Ocean, and Pacific island nations. The need for sugar crop laborers became a major driver of large migrations, some people voluntarily accepting indentured servitude and others forcibly imported as slaves.
Grown in tropical and subtropical regions, sugarcane is the world's largest crop by production quantity, totalling 1.9 billion tonnes in 2020, with Brazil accounting for 40% of the world total. Sugarcane accounts for 79% of sugar produced globally (most of the rest is made from sugar beets). About 70% of the sugar produced comes from Saccharum officinarum and its hybrids. All sugarcane species can interbreed, and the major commercial cultivars are complex hybrids.
White sugar is produced from sugarcane in specialized mill factories. Sugarcane reeds are used to make pens, mats, screens, and thatch. The young, unexpanded flower head of Saccharum edule (duruka) is eaten raw, steamed, or toasted, and prepared in various ways in Southeast Asia, such as certain island communities of Indonesia as well as in Oceanic countries like Fiji.
== Etymology ==
The term sugarcane is a combination of two words: "sugar" and "cane". The former ultimately derives from Sanskrit शर्करा (śárkarā). As sugar was traded and spread West, this became سُكَّر (sukkar) in Arabic, saccharum or succarum in Latin, zucchero in Italian, and eventually sucre in both Middle French and Middle English. The second term "cane" began to be used alongside it as the crop was grown on plantations in the Caribbean.
== Characteristics ==
Sugarcane, a perennial tropical grass, exhibits a unique growth pattern characterized by lateral shoots emerging at its base, leading to the development of multiple stems. These stems typically attain a height of 3 to 4 meters (approximately 10 to 13 feet) and possess a diameter of about 5 centimeters (approximately 2 inches). As these stems mature, they evolve into cane stalks, constituting a substantial portion of the entire plant, accounting for roughly 75% of its composition.
A fully mature cane stalk generally comprises a composition of around 11–16% fiber, 12–16% soluble sugars, 2–3% non-sugar carbohydrates, and 63–73% water content. The successful cultivation of sugarcane hinges on a delicate interplay of several factors, including climatic conditions, soil properties, the selection of specific varieties, and the timing of the harvest.
In terms of yield, the average production of cane stalk stands at 60–70 tonnes per hectare (equivalent to 24–28 long tons per acre or 27–31 short tons per acre) annually. However, this yield figure is not fixed and can vary significantly, ranging from 30 to 180 tonnes per hectare. This variance is contingent upon the level of knowledge applied and the approach to crop management embraced in the cultivation of sugarcane. Ultimately, the successful cultivation of this valuable crop demands a thoughtful integration of various factors to optimize its growth and productivity.
Sugarcane is a cash crop, but it is also used as livestock fodder. The sugarcane genome is one of the most complex plant genomes known, mostly due to interspecific hybridization and polyploidization.
== History ==
The two centers of domestication for sugarcane are one for Saccharum officinarum by Papuans in New Guinea and another for Saccharum sinense by Austronesians in Taiwan and southern China. Papuans and Austronesians originally primarily used sugarcane as food for domesticated pigs. The spread of both S. officinarum and S. sinense is closely linked to the migrations of the Austronesian peoples. Saccharum barberi was cultivated in India only after the introduction of S. officinarum.
S. officinarum was first domesticated in New Guinea and the islands east of the Wallace Line by Papuans, where it is the modern center of diversity. Beginning around 6,000 BP, several strains were selectively bred from the native Saccharum robustum. From New Guinea, it spread westwards to Maritime Southeast Asia after contact with Austronesians, where it hybridized with Saccharum spontaneum.
The second domestication center is southern China and Taiwan, where S. sinense was a primary cultigen of the Austronesian peoples. Words for sugarcane are reconstructed as *təbuS or *CebuS in Proto-Austronesian, which became *tebuh in Proto-Malayo-Polynesian. It was one of the original major crops of the Austronesian peoples from at least 5,500 BP. Introduction of the sweeter S. officinarum may have gradually replaced it throughout its cultivated range in maritime Southeast Asia.
From Insular Southeast Asia, S. officinarum was spread eastward into Polynesia and Micronesia by Austronesian voyagers as a canoe plant by around 3,500 BP. It was also spread westward and northward by around 3,000 BP to China and India by Austronesian traders, where it further hybridized with S. sinense and S. barberi. From there, it spread further into western Eurasia and the Mediterranean.
The earliest known production of crystalline sugar began in northern India. The earliest evidence of sugar production comes from ancient Sanskrit and Pali texts. Around the eighth century, Muslim and Arab traders introduced sugar from medieval India to the other parts of the Abbasid Caliphate in the Mediterranean, Mesopotamia, Egypt, North Africa, and Andalusia. By the 10th century, sources state that every village in Mesopotamia grew sugarcane. It was among the early crops brought to the Americas by the Spanish, mainly Andalusians, from their fields in the Canary Islands, and the Portuguese from their fields in the Madeira Islands. An article on sugarcane cultivation in Spain is included in Ibn al-'Awwam's 12th-century Book on Agriculture.
The first chemically refined sugar appeared on the scene in India about 2,500 years ago. From there, the technique spread east towards China, and west towards Persia and the early Islamic worlds, eventually reaching the Mediterranean in the 13th century. Cyprus and Sicily became important centers for sugar production.
In colonial times, sugar formed one side of the triangle trade of New World raw materials, along with European manufactured goods and African slaves. It was during Christopher Columbus's second voyage to the Americas that he first brought sugarcane to the Caribbean (and the New World), initially to the island of Hispaniola (modern-day Haiti and the Dominican Republic). The first sugar harvest happened in Hispaniola in 1501; many sugar mills were constructed in Cuba and Jamaica by the 1520s. The Portuguese introduced sugarcane to Brazil. By 1540, there were 800 cane sugar mills in Santa Catarina Island and another 2,000 on the north coast of Brazil, Demarara, and Suriname.
Sugar, often in the form of molasses, was shipped from the Caribbean to Europe or New England, where it was used to make rum. The profits from the sale of sugar were then used to purchase manufactured goods, which were then shipped to West Africa, where they were bartered for slaves. The slaves were then brought back to the Caribbean to be sold to sugar planters. The profits from the sale of the slaves were then used to buy more sugar, which was shipped to Europe. Toil in the sugar plantations became a main basis for the Atlantic slave trade, supplying people to work under brutal coercion.
The passage of the 1833 Slavery Abolition Act led to the end of slavery through most of the British Empire, and many of the emancipated slaves no longer worked on sugarcane plantations when they had a choice. West Indian planters, therefore, needed new workers, and they found cheap labour in China and India. The workers were subject to indenture, a long-established form of contract, which bound them to unfree labour for a fixed term. The conditions where the indentured servants worked were frequently abysmal, owing to a lack of care among the planters. The first ships carrying indentured labourers from India left in 1836. The migrations to serve sugarcane plantations led to a significant number of ethnic Indians, Southeast Asians, and Chinese people settling in various parts of the world. In some islands and countries, the South Asian migrants now constitute between 10 and 50% of the population. Sugarcane plantations and Asian ethnic groups continue to thrive in countries such as Fiji, South Africa, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Guyana, Jamaica, Trinidad, Martinique, French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Grenada, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, St. Kitts, St. Croix, Suriname, Nevis, and Mauritius.
Between 1863 and 1900, merchants and plantation owners in Queensland and New South Wales (now part of the Commonwealth of Australia) brought between 55,000 and 62,500 people from the South Pacific islands to work on sugarcane plantations. An estimated one-third of these workers were coerced or kidnapped into slavery (known as blackbirding); many others were paid very low wages. Between 1904 and 1908, most of the 10,000 remaining workers were deported in an effort to keep Australia racially homogeneous and protect white workers from cheap foreign labour.
Cuban sugar derived from sugarcane was exported to the USSR, where it received price supports and was ensured a guaranteed market. The 1991 dissolution of the Soviet state forced the closure of most of Cuba's sugar industry.
Sugarcane remains an important part of the economy of Cuba, Guyana, Belize, Barbados, and Haiti, along with the Dominican Republic, Guadeloupe, Jamaica, and other islands.
About 70% of the sugar produced globally comes from S. officinarum and hybrids using this species.
Sugar occupies 26,942,686 hectares of land across the globe and is the third most valuable crop.
== Cultivation ==
Sugarcane cultivation requires a tropical or subtropical climate, with a minimum of 60 cm (24 in) of annual moisture. It is one of the most efficient photosynthesizers in the plant kingdom. It is a C4 plant, able to convert up to 1% of incident solar energy into biomass. In primary growing regions across the tropics and subtropics, sugarcane crops can produce over 15 kg/m2 of cane.
Sugarcane accounted for around 21% of global crop production over the 2000–2021 period. The Americas was the leading region in the production of sugarcane (52% of the world total).
Once a major crop of the southeastern region of the United States, sugarcane cultivation declined there during the late 20th century, and in the 21st century is primarily confined to small plantations in Florida, Louisiana, and southeast Texas. Sugarcane cultivation ceased in Hawaii when the last operating sugar plantation in the state shut down in 2016.
Sugarcane is cultivated in the tropics and subtropics in areas with a plentiful supply of water for a continuous period of more than 6–7 months each year, either from natural rainfall or through irrigation. The crop does not tolerate severe frosts. Therefore, most of the world's sugarcane is grown between 22°N and 22°S, and some up to 33°N and 33°S. When sugarcane crops are found outside this range, such as the KwaZulu-Natal region of South Africa, it is normally due to anomalous climatic conditions in the region, such as warm ocean currents that sweep down the coast. In terms of altitude, sugarcane crops are found up to 1,600 m or 5,200 ft close to the equator in countries such as Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru.
Sugarcane can be grown on many soils ranging from highly fertile, well-drained mollisols, through heavy cracking vertisols, infertile acid oxisols and ultisols, peaty histosols, to rocky andisols. Both plentiful sunshine and water supplies increase cane production. This has made desert countries with good irrigation facilities such as Egypt some of the highest-yielding sugarcane-cultivating regions. Sugarcane consumes 9% of the world's potash fertilizer production.
Although some sugarcanes produce seeds, modern stem cutting has become the most common reproduction method. Each cutting must contain at least one bud, and the cuttings are sometimes hand-planted. In more technologically advanced countries, such as the United States and Australia, billet planting is common. Billets (stalks or stalk sections) harvested by a mechanical harvester are planted by a machine that opens and recloses the ground. Once planted, a stand can be harvested several times; after each harvest, the cane sends up new stalks, called ratoons. Successive harvests give decreasing yields, eventually justifying replanting. Two to 10 harvests are usually made, depending on the type of culture. In a country with mechanical agriculture looking for high production of large fields, as in North America, sugarcanes are replanted after two or three harvests to avoid lowering yields. In countries with a more traditional type of agriculture with smaller fields and hand harvesting, as in the French island of Réunion, sugarcane is often harvested up to 10 years before replanting.
Sugarcane is harvested by hand and mechanically. Hand harvesting accounts for more than half of production, and is dominant in the developing world. In hand harvesting, the field is first set on fire. The fire burns up dry leaves, and chases away or kills venomous snakes, without harming the stalks and roots. Harvesters then cut the cane just above ground level using cane knives or machetes. A skilled harvester can cut 500 kg (1,100 lb) of sugarcane per hour.
Mechanical harvesting uses a combine, or sugarcane harvester. The Austoft 7000 series, the original modern harvester design, has now been copied by other companies, including Cameco / John Deere. The machine cuts the cane at the base of the stalk, strips the leaves, chops the cane into consistent lengths, and deposits it into a transporter following alongside. The harvester then blows the trash back onto the field. Such machines can harvest 100 long tons (100 t) each hour, but harvested cane must be rapidly processed. Once cut, sugarcane begins to lose its sugar content, and damage to the cane during mechanical harvesting accelerates this decline. This decline is offset because a modern chopper harvester can complete the harvest faster and more efficiently than hand cutting and loading. Austoft also developed a series of hydraulic high-lift infield transporters to work alongside its harvesters to allow even more rapid transfer of cane to, for example, the nearest railway siding. This mechanical harvesting does not require the field to be set on fire; the residue left in the field by the machine consists of cane tops and dead leaves, which serve as mulch for the next planting.
=== Pests ===
The cane beetle (also known as cane grub) can substantially reduce crop yield by eating roots; it can be controlled with imidacloprid (Confidor) or chlorpyrifos (Lorsban). Other important pests are the larvae of some butterfly/moth species, including the turnip moth, the sugarcane borer (Diatraea saccharalis), the African sugarcane borer (Eldana saccharina), the Mexican rice borer (Eoreuma loftini), the African armyworm (Spodoptera exempta), leafcutter ants, termites, spittlebugs (especially Mahanarva fimbriolata and Deois flavopicta), and Migdolus fryanus (a beetle). The planthopper insect Eumetopina flavipes acts as a virus vector, which causes the sugarcane disease ramu stunt. Sesamia grisescens is a major pest in Papua New Guinea and so is a serious concern for the Australian industry were it to cross over. To head off such a problem, the Federal Government has pre-announced that they would cover 80% of response costs if it were necessary.
=== Pathogens ===
Numerous pathogens infect sugarcane, such as sugarcane grassy shoot disease caused by Candidatus Phytoplasma sacchari, whiptail disease or sugarcane smut, pokkah boeng caused by Fusarium moniliforme, Xanthomonas axonopodis bacteria causes Gumming Disease, and red rot disease caused by Colletotrichum falcatum. Viral diseases affecting sugarcane include sugarcane mosaic virus, maize streak virus, and sugarcane yellow leaf virus.
Yang et al., 2017 provides a genetic map developed for USDA ARS-run breeding programs for brown rust of sugarcane.
Some sugarcane varieties are capable of fixing atmospheric nitrogen in association with the bacterium Gluconacetobacter diazotrophicus. Unlike legumes and other nitrogen-fixing plants that form root nodules in the soil in association with bacteria, G. diazotrophicus lives within the intercellular spaces of the sugarcane's stem. Coating seeds with the bacteria was assayed in 2006 with the intention of enabling crop species to fix nitrogen for their own use.
=== Conditions for sugarcane workers ===
At least 20,000 people are estimated to have died of chronic kidney disease in Central America in the past two decades, most of them sugarcane workers along the Pacific coast. This condition is termed Mesoamerican nephropathy. This may be due to working long hours in the heat without adequate fluid intake.
Additionally, some of the workers are being exposed to hazards such as high temperatures, harmful pesticides, and venomous animals. This occurs during the process of cutting the sugarcane manually, causing physical ailments due to constant repetitive movements for hours every work day.
In India, especially in Maharashtra, sugarcane production is linked to forced labour, as a result of an exploitative advance payment system for workers that puts them deeply in debt and requires them to return year after year, earning less than $5 a day. Working conditions are generally very poor, with workers migrating during the harvest season and living in makeshift tents in the fields they harvest, with no toilets, electricity, or running water. Child labour is common, and child marriage between sugar harvesters is frequent, despite both being illegal. Indian sugarcane production is also linked to an unusually high rate of hysterectomies (some 1 in 5 sugarcane harvesting women), which women are pressured to receive by sugarcane producers, and the lack of sanitary facilities, family planning options, or medical leave. India is the world's second-largest sugar producer, and Maharashtra produces one-third of the country's sugar, which then enters the global supply chain—making its provenance hard to track. The Coca-Cola Company and PepsiCo have bought significant amounts of sugar from Maharashtra since at least the 2010s, mostly for use in Indian soft drinks, but deny that they are complicit in labor abuses.
== Processing ==
Traditionally, sugarcane processing requires two stages. Mills extract raw sugar from freshly harvested cane and "mill-white" sugar is sometimes produced immediately after the first stage at sugar-extraction mills, intended for local consumption. Sugar crystals appear naturally white in color during the crystallization process. Sulfur dioxide is added to inhibit the formation of color-inducing molecules and to stabilize the sugar juices during evaporation. Refineries, often located nearer to consumers in North America, Europe, and Japan, then produce refined white sugar, which is 99% sucrose. These two stages are slowly merging. Increasing affluence in the sugarcane-producing tropics increases demand for refined sugar products, driving a trend toward combined milling and refining.
=== Milling ===
Sugarcane processing produces cane sugar (sucrose) from sugarcane. Other products of the processing include bagasse, molasses, and filter cake.
Bagasse, the residual dry fiber of the cane after cane juice has been extracted, is used for several purposes:
fuel for the boilers and kilns
production of paper, paperboard products, and reconstituted panelboard
agricultural mulch
as a raw material for production of chemicals
The primary use of bagasse and bagasse residue is as a fuel source for boilers in the generation of process steam in sugar plants. Dried filter cake is used as an animal feed supplement, fertilizer, and source of sugarcane wax.
Molasses is produced in two forms: blackstrap, which has a characteristic strong flavor, and a purer molasses syrup. Blackstrap molasses is sold as a food and dietary supplement. It is also a common ingredient in animal feed, and is used to produce ethanol, rum, and citric acid. Purer molasses syrups are sold as molasses, and may also be blended with maple syrup, invert sugars, or corn syrup. Both forms of molasses are used in baking.
=== Refining ===
Sugar refining further purifies the raw sugar. It is first mixed with heavy syrup and then centrifuged in a process called "affination". Its purpose is to wash away the sugar crystals' outer coating, which is less pure than the crystal interior. The remaining sugar is then dissolved to make a syrup, about 60% solids by weight.
The sugar solution is clarified by the addition of phosphoric acid and calcium hydroxide, which combine to precipitate calcium phosphate. The calcium phosphate particles entrap some impurities and absorb others, then float to the top of the tank where they can be skimmed off. An alternative to this "phosphatation" technique is "carbonatation", which is similar, but uses carbon dioxide and calcium hydroxide to produce a calcium carbonate precipitate.
After filtering any remaining solids, the clarified syrup is decolorized by filtration through activated carbon. Bone char or coal-based activated carbon is traditionally used in this role. Some remaining color-forming impurities are adsorbed by the carbon. The purified syrup is then concentrated to supersaturation and repeatedly crystallized in a vacuum, to produce white refined sugar. As in a sugar mill, the sugar crystals are separated from the molasses by centrifuging. Additional sugar is recovered by blending the remaining syrup with the washings from affination and again crystallizing to produce brown sugar. When no more sugar can be economically recovered, the final molasses still contains 30–35% sucrose and 10–25% glucose and fructose.
To produce granulated sugar, in which individual grains do not clump, sugar must be dried, first by heating in a rotary dryer, and then by blowing cool air through it for several days.
=== Ribbon cane syrup ===
Ribbon cane is a subtropical type that was once widely grown in the Southern United States, as far north as coastal North Carolina. The juice was extracted with horse- or mule-powered crushers; the juice was boiled, like maple syrup, in a flat pan, and then used in the syrup form as a food sweetener. It is not currently a commercial crop, but a few growers find ready sales for their product.
== Production ==
In 2022, global production of sugarcane was 1.92 billion tonnes, with Brazil producing 38% of the world total, India with 23%, and China producing 5% (table).
Worldwide, 26 million hectares were devoted to sugarcane cultivation in 2020. The average worldwide yield of sugarcane crops in 2022 was 74 tonnes per hectare, led by Peru with 121 tonnes per hectare. The theoretical possible yield for sugarcane is about 280 tonnes per hectare per year, and small experimental plots in Brazil have demonstrated yields of 236–280 tonnes of cane per hectare.
From 2008 to 2016, production of standards-compliant sugarcane experienced a compound annual growth rate of about 52%, while conventional sugarcane increased at less than 1%.
== Environmental consequences ==
=== Soil degradation and erosion ===
The cultivation of sugarcane can lead to increased soil loss through the removal of soil at harvest, as well as improper irrigation practices, which can result in erosion. Erosion is especially significant when the sugarcane is grown on slopes or hillsides, which increases the rate of water runoff. Generally, it is recommended that sugarcane is not planted in areas with a slope greater than 8%. However, in certain areas, such as parts of the Caribbean and South Africa, slopes greater than 20% have been planted. Increased erosion can lead to the removal of organic and nutrient-rich material, which can decrease future crop yields. It can also result in sediments and other pollutants being washed into aquatic habitats, which can result in a wide range of environmental issues, including eutrophication and acidification.
Sugarcane cultivation can also result in soil compaction, which is caused by the use of heavy, infield machinery. Along with affecting invertebrate and fauna within the upper layers of the soil, compaction can also lead to decreased porosity. This in turn can increase surface runoff, resulting in greater leaching and erosion.
=== Habitat destruction ===
Due to the large quantity of water required, sugarcane cultivation heavily relies on irrigation. Additionally, since large amounts of soil are removed with the crop during harvest, significant washing occurs during the processing phase. In many countries, such as India and Australia, this requirement has placed a strain on available resources, requiring the construction of barrages and other dams. This has altered the amount of water reaching aquatic habitats, and has contributed to the degradation of ecosystems such as the Great Barrier Reef and Indus Delta.
Sugarcane has also contributed to habitat destruction through the clearance of land. Seven countries around the world devote more than 50% of their land to the cultivation of sugarcane. Sugarcane fields have replaced tropical rain forests and wetlands. While the majority of this clearance occurred in the past, expansions have occurred within the past couple decades, further contributing to habitat destruction.
=== Mitigation efforts ===
A wide variety of mitigation efforts can be implemented to reduce the consequences of sugarcane cultivation. Among these efforts is switching to alternative irrigation techniques, such as drip irrigation, which are more water efficient. Water efficiency can also be improved by employing methods such as trash mulching, which has been shown to increase water intake and storage. Along with reducing the overall water use, this method can also decrease soil runoff, and therefore prevent pollutants from entering the environment. In areas with a slope greater than 11%, it is also recommended that zero tillage or cane strip planting are implemented to help prevent soil loss.
Sugarcane processing produces a wide variety of pollutants, including heavy metals and bagasse, which can be released into the environment through wastewater discharge. To prevent this, alternative treatment methods such as high rate anaerobic digestions can be implemented to better treat this wastewater. Stormwater drains can also be installed to prevent uncontrolled runoff from reaching aquatic ecosystems.
== Ethanol ==
Ethanol is generally available as a byproduct of sugar production. It can be used as a biofuel alternative to gasoline, and is widely used in cars in Brazil. It is an alternative to gasoline, and may become the primary product of sugarcane processing, rather than sugar
In Brazil, gasoline is required to contain at least 22% bioethanol. This bioethanol is sourced from Brazil's large sugarcane crop.
The production of ethanol from sugarcane is more energy efficient than from corn or sugar beets or palm/vegetable oils, particularly if cane bagasse is used to produce heat and power for the process. Furthermore, if biofuels are used for crop production and transport, the fossil energy input needed for each ethanol energy unit can be very low. EIA estimates that with an integrated sugarcane to ethanol technology, the well-to-wheels CO2 emissions can be 90% lower than conventional gasoline. A textbook on renewable energy describes the energy transformation:
Presently, 75 tons of raw sugarcane are produced annually per hectare in Brazil. The cane delivered to the processing plant is called burned and cropped (b&c), and represents 77% of the mass of the raw cane. The reason for this reduction is that the stalks are separated from the leaves (which are burned and whose ashes are left in the field as fertilizer), and from the roots that remain in the ground to sprout for the next crop. Average cane production is, therefore, 58 tons of b&c per hectare per year. ... Each ton of b&c yields 740 kg of juice (135 kg of sucrose and 605 kg of water) and 260 kg of moist bagasse (130 kg of dry bagasse). Since the lower heating value of sucrose is 16.5 MJ/kg, and that of the bagasse is 19.2 MJ/kg, the total heating value of a ton of b&c is 4.7 GJ of which 2.2 GJ come from the sucrose and 2.5 from the bagasse. ... Per hectare per year, the biomass produced corresponds to 0.27 TJ. This is equivalent to 0.86 W per square meter. Assuming an average insolation of 225 W per square meter, the photosynthetic efficiency of sugar cane is 0.38%. ... The 135 kg of sucrose found in 1 ton of b&c are transformed into 70 litres of ethanol with a combustion energy of 1.7 GJ. The practical sucrose-ethanol conversion efficiency is, therefore, 76% (compare with the theoretical 97%). ... One hectare of sugar cane yields 4,000 litres of ethanol per year (without any additional energy input, because the bagasse produced exceeds the amount needed to distill the final product). This, however, does not include the energy used in tilling, transportation, and so on. Thus, the solar energy-to-ethanol conversion efficiency is 0.13%.
== Bagasse applications ==
Sugarcane is a major crop in many countries. It is one of the plants with the highest bioconversion efficiency. Sugarcane crop is able to efficiently fix solar energy, yielding some 55 tonnes of dry matter per hectare of land annually. After harvest, the crop produces sugar juice and bagasse, the fibrous dry matter. This dry matter is biomass with potential as fuel for energy production. Bagasse can also be used as an alternative source of pulp for paper production.
Sugarcane bagasse is a potentially abundant source of energy for large producers of sugarcane, such as Brazil, India, and China. According to one report, with use of latest technologies, bagasse produced annually in Brazil has the potential of meeting 20% of Brazil's energy consumption by 2020.
=== Electricity production ===
A number of countries, in particular those lacking fossil fuels, have implemented energy conservation and efficiency measures to minimize the energy used in cane processing, and export any excess electricity to the grid. Bagasse is usually burned to produce steam, which in turn creates electricity. Current technologies, such as those in use in Mauritius, produce over 100 kWh of electricity per tonne of bagasse. With a total world harvest of over one billion tonnes of sugarcane per year, the global energy potential from bagasse is over 100,000 GWh. Using Mauritius as a reference, an annual potential of 10,000 GWh of additional electricity could be produced throughout Africa. Electrical generation from bagasse could become quite important, particularly to the rural populations of sugarcane producing nations.
Recent cogeneration technology plants are being designed to produce from 200 to over 300 kWh of electricity per tonne of bagasse. As sugarcane is a seasonal crop, shortly after harvest the supply of bagasse would peak, requiring power generation plants to strategically manage the storage of bagasse.
=== Biogas production ===
A greener alternative to burning bagasse for the production of electricity is to convert bagasse into biogas. Technologies are being developed to use enzymes to transform bagasse into advanced biofuel and biogas.
== Sugarcane as food ==
In most regions where sugarcane is cultivated, a wide range of foods and beverages are produced directly from the plant.
The following foods and drinks are derived from sugarcane:
Cane vinegar - traditional vinegar from the Philippines made from sugarcane juice fermented in clay jars. Also produced in other countries in modern times. Left to ferment further, it becomes the alcoholic drink basi.
Gâteau de Sirop – a cake made using sugarcane syrup.
Jaggery – a solidified molasses, known as gur, gud, or gul in modern Indo-Aryan. It is traditionally produced by evaporating sugarcane juice into a thick mass that is cooled and molded. Modern production methods may partially freeze-dry the juice to reduce caramelization and lighten the color. Jaggery is used as a sweetener in traditional dishes, sweets, and desserts.
Molasses – a syrupy by-product used as a sweetener and as an accompaniment to foods such as cheese or cookies.
Panela – solid blocks of sucrose and fructose produced by boiling and evaporating sugarcane juice; it is a staple food in Colombia and other parts of Central and South America.
Rapadura – a minimally refined sugarcane product, common in Latin American countries such as Brazil, Argentina, and Venezuela (where it is known as papelón) and the Caribbean.
Raw sugarcane – chewed directly to extract the juice.
Rock candy – crystallized sugarcane juice.
Sayur nganten – an Indonesian soup made from the stem of trubuk (Saccharum edule), a type of sugarcane.
Sugarcane juice – fresh juice extracted by hand or small mills and commonly served with lemon and ice. It is known by many regional names, including air tebu, usacha rass, guarab, guarapa, guarapo, papelón, aseer asab, ganna sharbat, mosto, caldo de cana, and nước mía.
Sugarcane liquor - various alcoholic beverages distilled from sugarcane juice or molasses.
Aguardiente - a distilled liquor from Spain and Portugal
Cachaça – a distilled alcoholic beverage made from sugarcane juice; it is the most popular spirit in Brazil.
Clairin - distilled liquor made from sugarcane juice from Haiti
Desi daru - distilled liquor made from molasses from India
Falernum – a sweet, slightly alcoholic liqueur made from sugarcane juice from the Caribbean
Guaro - distilled liquor from Latin America
Rum - liquor made from fermenting and distilling sugarcane juice or molasses from Barbados
Viche – a homebrewed alcoholic beverage from Colombia
Sugarcane wine – various fermented alcoholic beverages made from sugarcane juice. It has numerous types from different cultures:
Basi - traditional sugarcane wine made from sugarcane juice and flavored with samak tree (Macaranga tanarius) bark extracts from the northern Philippines
Byais - traditional mead made from honey, lengkuas ginger, and sugarcane juice from Mindanao, Philippines.
Intus - traditional alcoholic drink made from sugarcane juice boiled into a syrup and mixed with kabarawan (Neolitsea villosa) bark from the Visayas and Mindanao islands of the Philippines
Palek - traditional sugarcane wine made from sugarcane juice and flavored with black ebony (Diospyros ferrea) bark from the Batanes Islands of the Philippines
Sidhu - traditional sugarcane wine made from sugarcane juice or molasses from South Asia
Syrup – a traditional sweetener used in soft drinks worldwide, though in the United States it has been largely replaced by high fructose corn syrup due to lower costs associated with corn subsidies and sugar tariffs.
In the 21st century, sugar is estimated to contribute approximately 20% of the total caloric intake in modern diets.
== Sugarcane as feed ==
Many parts of the sugarcane are commonly used as animal feeds where the plants are cultivated. The leaves make a good forage for ruminants.
== Gallery ==
== See also ==
Sugar industry of the Philippines
Sugar plantations in Hawaii
Sugar plantations in the Caribbean
Trapiche
== References ==
== Sources ==
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0 (license statement/permission). Text taken from World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2023​, FAO.
== External links ==
OECD/FAO (2021). 5. Sugar. OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2021–2030. Paris: OECD Publishing. doi:10.1787/19428846-en. Global sugar & sugar cane production stats.

Legumes are plants in the pea family Fabaceae (or Leguminosae), or the fruit or seeds of such plants. When used as a dry grain for human consumption, the seeds are also called pulses. Legumes are grown agriculturally, primarily for human consumption, but also as livestock forage and silage, and as soil-enhancing green manure. Legumes produce a botanically unique type of fruit—a simple dry fruit that develops from a simple carpel and usually dehisces (opens along a seam) on two sides.
Most legumes have symbiotic nitrogen-fixing bacteria, Rhizobia, in structures called root nodules. Some of the fixed nitrogen becomes available to later crops, so legumes play a key role in crop rotation.
== Terminology ==
The term pulse, as used by the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), is reserved for legume crops harvested solely for the dry seed. This excludes green beans and green peas, which are considered vegetable crops. Also excluded are seeds that are mainly grown for oil extraction (oilseeds like soybeans and peanuts), and seeds which are used exclusively for sowing forage (clovers, alfalfa). However, in common usage, these distinctions are not always clearly made, and many of the varieties used for dried pulses are also used for green vegetables, with their beans in pods while young.
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) recognizes 11 primary pulses, excluding green vegetable legumes (such as green peas) and legumes used mainly for oil extraction (for example, soybeans and groundnuts) or used only as seed (such as clover and alfalfa).
Dry beans
Kidney bean, navy bean, pinto bean, black turtle bean, haricot bean (Phaseolus vulgaris)
Lima bean, butter bean (Phaseolus lunatus)
Adzuki bean, azuki bean (Vigna angularis)
Mung bean, golden gram, green gram (Vigna radiata)
Black gram, urad (Vigna mungo)
Scarlet runner bean (Phaseolus coccineus)
Ricebean (Vigna umbellata)
Moth bean (Vigna aconitifolia)
Tepary bean (Phaseolus acutifolius)
Dry broad beans
Horse bean (Vicia faba equina)
Broad bean (Vicia faba)
Field bean (Vicia faba)
Dry peas
Garden pea (Pisum sativum var. sativum)
Protein pea (Pisum sativum var. arvense)
Chickpea (also known as garbanzo and Bengal gram)
Dry cowpea, black-eyed pea, blackeye bean
Pigeon pea (aka Arhar/Toor, cajan pea, Congo bean, gandules)
Lentil
Bambara groundnut (aka earth pea)
Vetch, common vetch
Lupins
Pulses NES including:
Lablab, hyacinth bean (Lablab purpureus)
Jack bean (Canavalia ensiformis), sword bean (Canavalia gladiata)
Winged bean (Psophocarpus tetragonolobus)
Velvet bean, cowitch (Mucuna pruriens var. utilis)
Yam bean (Pachyrhizus erosus)
== Distribution ==
Legumes are widely distributed as the third-largest land plant family in terms of number of species, behind only the Orchidaceae and Asteraceae, with about 751 genera and some 19,000 known species, constituting about seven percent of flowering plant species.
== Ecology ==
=== Nitrogen fixation ===
Many legumes contain symbiotic bacteria called Rhizobia within root nodules of their root systems (plants belonging to the genus Styphnolobium are one exception to this rule). These bacteria have the special ability of fixing nitrogen from atmospheric, molecular nitrogen (N2) into ammonia (NH3). The chemical reaction is:
N2 + 8 H+ + 8 e− → 2 NH3 + H2
Ammonia is converted to another form, ammonium (NH+4), usable by (some) plants, by the following reaction:
NH3 + H+ → NH+4
This arrangement means that the root nodules are sources of nitrogen for legumes, making them relatively rich in nitrogenous amino acids and protein. Nitrogen is therefore a necessary ingredient in the production of proteins.
When a legume plant dies in the field, for example following the harvest, all of its remaining nitrogen, incorporated into amino acids inside the remaining plant parts, is released back into the soil. In the soil, the amino acids are converted to nitrate (NO−3), making the nitrogen available to other plants, thereby serving as fertilizer for future crops.
In many traditional and organic farming practices, crop rotation or polyculture involving legumes is common. By alternating between legumes and non-legumes, or by growing both together for part of the growing season, the field can receive a sufficient amount of nitrogenous compounds to produce a good result without adding nitrogenous fertilizer. Legumes are often used as green manure.
Sri Lanka developed the polyculture practice known as coconut-soybean intercropping. Grain legumes are grown in coconut (Cocos nuficera) groves in two ways: intercropping or as a cash crop. These are grown mainly for their protein, vegetable oil and ability to uphold soil fertility. However, continuous cropping after 3–4 years decrease grain yields significantly.
=== Pests and diseases ===
A common pest of grain legumes that is noticed in the tropical and subtropical Asia, Africa, Australia and Oceania are minuscule and highly destructive flies that belong to the family Agromyzidae, dubbed "bean flies". The host range of these flies is very wide amongst cultivated legumes. Infestation of plants starts from germination through to harvest, and they can destroy an entire crop in early stage. Black bean aphids are a serious pest to broad beans and other beans. Common hosts for this pest are fathen, thistle and dock. Pea weevils and bean weevils damage leaf margins, leaving characteristic semi-circular notches. Stem nematodes are very widespread but will be found more frequently in areas where host plants are grown.
Common legume diseases include anthracnose, caused by Colletotrichum trifolii; common leaf spot caused by Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae; crown wart caused by Physoderma alfalfae; downy mildew caused by Peronospora trifoliorum; root rot caused by Fusarium spp.; rust caused by Uromyces striatus; crown and stem rot caused by Sclerotinia trifoliorum; Southern blight caused by Sclerotium rolfsii; pythium (browning) root rot caused by Pythium spp.; fusarium wilt caused by Fusarium oxysporum; root knot caused by Meloidogyne hapla. These are all classified as biotic problems.
Abiotic problems include nutrient deficiencies, (nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, copper, magnesium, manganese, boron, zinc), pollutants (air, water, soil, pesticide injury, fertilizer burn), toxic concentration of minerals, and unfavorable growth conditions.
== Storage ==
Seed viability decreases with longer storage time. Studies of vetch, broad beans, and peas show that they last about 5 years in storage. Environmental factors that are important in influencing germination are relative humidity and temperature. Two rules apply to moisture content between 5 and 14 percent: the life of the seed will last longer if the storage temperature is reduced by 5 degree Celsius. Secondly, the storage moisture content will decrease if temperature is reduced by 1 degree Celsius.
== Uses ==
Cultivated legumes encompass a diverse range of agricultural classifications, spanning forage, grain, flowering, pharmaceutical/industrial, fallow/green manure, and timber categories. A notable characteristic of many commercially cultivated legume species is their versatility, often assuming multiple roles concurrently. The extent of these roles is contingent upon the stage of maturity at which they are harvested.
=== Human consumption ===
Grain legumes are cultivated for their seeds, for humans and animals to eat, or for oils for industrial uses. Grain legumes include beans, lentils, lupins, peas, and peanuts.
Legumes are a key ingredient in vegan meat and dairy substitutes. They are growing in use as a plant-based protein source in the world marketplace. Products containing legumes grew by 39% in Europe between 2013 and 2017.
There is a common misconception that adding salt before cooking prevents them from cooking through. Legumes may not soften because they are old, or because of hard water or acidic ingredients in the pot; salting before cooking results in better seasoning.
==== Nutritional value ====
Legumes are a significant source of protein, dietary fibre, carbohydrates, and dietary minerals; for example, a 100-gram serving of cooked chickpeas contains 18 percent of the Daily Value (DV) for protein, 30 percent DV for dietary fiber, 43 percent DV for folate and 52 percent DV for manganese.
Legumes are an excellent source of resistant starch; this is broken down by bacteria in the large intestine to produce short-chain fatty acids (such as butyrate) used by intestinal cells for food energy.
=== Forage ===
Forage legumes are of two broad types. Some, like alfalfa, clover, vetch (Vicia), stylo (Stylosanthes), or Arachis, are sown in pasture and grazed by livestock. Others, such as Leucaena or Albizia, are woody shrubs or trees that are either broken down by livestock or regularly cut by humans to provide fodder. Legume-based feeds improve animal performance over a diet of perennial grasses. Factors include larger consumption, faster digestion, and higher feed conversion rate.
The type of crop grown for animal rearing depends on the farming system. In cattle rearing, legume trees such as Gliricidia sepium can be planted along edges of fields to provide shade for cattle, the leaves and bark are often eaten by cattle. Green manure can be grown between harvesting the main crop and the planting of the next crop.
=== Other uses ===
Legume species grown for their flowers include lupins, which are farmed commercially for their blooms as well as being popular in gardens worldwide. Industrially farmed legumes include Indigofera and Acacia species, which are cultivated for dye and natural gum production, respectively. Fallow or green manure legume species are cultivated to be tilled back into the soil in order to exploit the high levels of captured atmospheric nitrogen found in the roots of most legumes. Numerous legumes farmed for this purpose include Leucaena, Cyamopsis, and Sesbania species. Various legume species are farmed for timber production worldwide, including numerous Acacia species and Castanospermum australe.
Some legume trees, like the honey locust (Gleditsia) can be used in agroforestry. Others, including the black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia), Kentucky coffeetree (Gymnocladus dioicus), Laburnum, and the woody climbing vine Wisteria, have poisonous elements.
== History ==
Neanderthals and early modern humans used wild pulses when cooking meals 70,000 to 40,000 years ago. Traces of pulse production have been found around the Ravi River (Punjab), the seat of the Indus Valley civilisation, from c. 3300 BC. Meanwhile, evidence of lentil cultivation has also been found in Egyptian pyramids and cuneiform recipes. Dry pea seeds have been discovered in a Swiss village that are believed to date back to the Stone Age. Archaeological evidence suggests that these peas must have been grown in the eastern Mediterranean and Mesopotamian regions at least 5,000 years ago and in Britain as early as the 11th century. The soybean was domesticated around 5,000 years ago in China from a descendant of the wild vine Glycine soja.
The oldest-known domesticated beans in the Americas were found in Guitarrero Cave, an archaeological site in Peru, and dated to around the second millennium BC. Genetic analyses of the common bean Phaseolus show that it originated in Mesoamerica, and subsequently spread southward, along with maize and squash, traditional companion crops. In the United States, the domesticated soybean was introduced in 1770 by Benjamin Franklin after he sent seeds to Philadelphia from France.
=== International Year of Pulses ===
The International Year of Pulses 2016 was declared by the Sixty-eighth session of the United Nations General Assembly. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations was nominated to facilitate the implementation of the year in collaboration with governments, relevant organizations, non-governmental organizations and other relevant stakeholders. Its aim was to heighten public awareness of the nutritional benefits of pulses as part of sustainable food production aimed towards food security and nutrition. The year created an opportunity to encourage connections throughout the food chain that would better use pulse-based proteins, further global production of pulses, better use crop rotations and address challenges in the global trade of pulses.
== See also ==
Aquafaba
Legume lectin
List of bean soups
List of dried foods
List of legume dishes
Peanut allergy
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
"Pulses". NHS Choices. 30 April 2013. Archived from the original on 26 January 2017. Retrieved 9 January 2017.
Varshney, R.K.; Kudapa, H. (December 2013). "Legume biology: the basis for crop improvement". Functional Plant Biology. 40 (12). CSIRO Publishing: v–iii. Bibcode:2013FunPB..40D...5V. doi:10.1071/FPv40n12_FO. PMID 32481187.
== External links ==
The dictionary definition of legume at Wiktionary
Media related to Legumes at Wikimedia Commons

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.
This file is gratefully uploaded to the PG collection in
honor of Distributed Proofreaders having posted over
10,000 ebooks.
AGRICULTURE FOR
BEGINNERS
CHARLES WILLIAM BURKETT
EDITOR OF THE _AMERICAN AGRICULTURIST_
FORMERLY DIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION
KANSAS STATE AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE
FRANK LINCOLN STEVENS
PROFESSOR OF PLANT PATHOLOGY, UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS
FORMERLY TEACHER OF SCIENCE IN HIGH SCHOOL
COLUMBUS, OHIO
AND
DANIEL HARVEY HILL
FORMERLY PRESIDENT OF THE NORTH CAROLINA COLLEGE OF
AGRICULTURE AND MECHANIC ARTS
_REVISED EDITION_
GINN AND COMPANY
BOSTON . NEW YORK . CHICAGO . LONDON
ATLANTA . DALLAS . COLUMBUS . SAN FRANCISCO
COPYRIGHT, 1903, 1904, 1914, BY
CHARLES WILLIAM BURKETT, FRANK LINCOLN STEVENS AND DANIEL HARVEY HILL
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
329.7
The Athenaeum Press
GINN AND COMPANY . PROPRIETORS . BOSTON . U.S.A.
[Illustration: GETTING READY FOR WINTER]
PREFACE
Since its first publication "Agriculture for Beginners" has found a
welcome in thousands of schools and homes. Naturally many suggestions as
to changes, additions, and other improvements have reached its authors.
Naturally, too, the authors have busied themselves in devising methods
to add to the effectiveness of the book. Some additions have been made
almost every year since the book was published. To embody all these
changes and helpful suggestions into a strictly unified volume; to add
some further topics and sections; to bring all farm practices up to the
ideals of to-day; to include the most recent teaching of scientific
investigators--these were the objects sought in the thorough revision
which has just been given the book. The authors hope and think that the
remaking of the book has added to its usefulness and attractiveness.
They believe now, as they believed before, that there is no line of
separation between the science of agriculture and the practical art of
agriculture. They are assured by the success of this book that
agriculture is eminently a teachable subject. They see no difference
between teaching the child the fundamental principles of farming and
teaching the same child the fundamental truths of arithmetic, geography,
or grammar. They hold that a youth should be trained for the farm just
as carefully as he is trained for any other occupation, and that it is
unreasonable to expect him to succeed without training.
If they are right in these views, the training must begin in the public
schools. This is true for two reasons:
1. It is universally admitted that aptitudes are developed, tastes
acquired, and life habits formed during the years that a child is in the
public school. Hence, during these important years every child intended
for the farm should be taught to know and love nature, should be led to
form habits of observation, and should be required to begin a study of
those great laws upon which agriculture is based. A training like this
goes far toward making his life-work profitable and delightful.
2. Most boys and girls reared on a farm get no educational training
except that given in the public schools. If, then, the truths that
unlock the doors of nature are not taught in the public schools, nature
and nature's laws will always be hid in night to a majority of our
bread-winners. They must still in ignorance and hopeless drudgery tear
their bread from a reluctant soil.
The authors return hearty thanks to Professor Thomas F. Hunt, University
of California; Professor Augustine D. Selby, Ohio Experiment Station;
Professor W. F. Massey, horticulturist and agricultural writer; and
Professor Franklin Sherman, Jr., State Entomologist of North Carolina,
for aid in proofreading and in the preparation of some of the material.
CONTENTS
CHAPTER I. THE SOIL
SECTION PAGE
I. ORIGIN OF THE SOIL 1
II. TILLAGE OF THE SOIL 6
III. THE MOISTURE OF THE SOIL 9
IV. HOW THE WATER RISES IN THE SOIL 13
V. DRAINING THE SOIL 14
VI. IMPROVING THE SOIL 17
VII. MANURING THE SOIL 21
CHAPTER II. THE SOIL AND THE PLANT
VIII. ROOTS 25
IX. HOW THE PLANT FEEDS FROM THE SOIL 29
X. ROOT-TUBERCLES 30
XI. THE ROTATION OF CROPS 33
CHAPTER III. THE PLANT
XII. HOW THE PLANT FEEDS FROM THE AIR 39
XIII. THE SAP CURRENT 40
XIV. THE FLOWER AND THE SEED 42
XV. POLLINATION 46
XVI. CROSSES, HYBRIDS, AND CROSS-POLLINATION 48
XVII. PROPAGATION BY BUDS 51
XVIII. PLANT SEEDING 59
XIX. SELECTING SEED CORN 66
XX. WEEDS 69
XXI. SEED PURITY AND VITALITY 72
CHAPTER IV. HOW TO RAISE A FRUIT TREE
XXII. GRAFTING 78
XXIII. BUDDING 81
XXIV. PLANTING AND PRUNING 83
CHAPTER V. HORTICULTURE
XXV. MARKET-GARDENING 89
XXVI. FLOWER-GARDENING 108
CHAPTER VI. THE DISEASES OF PLANTS
XXVII. THE CAUSE AND NATURE OF PLANT DISEASE 122
XXVIII. YEAST AND BACTERIA 127
XXIX. PREVENTION OF PLANT DISEASE 129
XXX. SOME SPECIAL PLANT DISEASES 130
CHAPTER VII. ORCHARD, GARDEN, AND FIELD INSECTS
XXXI. INSECTS IN GENERAL 144
XXXII. ORCHARD INSECTS 152
XXXIII. GARDEN AND FIELD INSECTS 165
XXXIV. THE COTTON-BOLL WEEVIL 173
CHAPTER VIII. FARM CROPS
XXXV. COTTON 180
XXXVI. TOBACCO 189
XXXVII. WHEAT 192
XXXVIII. CORN 197
XXXIX. PEANUTS 202
XL. SWEET POTATOES 204
XLI. WHITE, OR IRISH, POTATOES 206
XLII. OATS 209
XLIII. RYE 213
XLIV. BARLEY 215
XLV. SUGAR PLANTS 217
XLVI. HEMP AND FLAX 226
XLVII. BUCKWHEAT 229
XLVIII. RICE 231
XLIX. THE TIMBER CROP 232
L. THE FARM GARDEN 235
CHAPTER IX. FEED STUFFS
LI. GRASSES 238
LII. LEGUMES 244
CHAPTER X. DOMESTIC ANIMALS
LIII. HORSES 262
LIV. CATTLE 270
LV. SHEEP 276
LVI. SWINE 279
LVII. FARM POULTRY 282
LVIII. BEE CULTURE 286
LIX. WHY WE FEED ANIMALS 290
CHAPTER XI. FARM DAIRYING
LX. THE DAIRY COW 293
LXI. MILK, CREAM, CHURNING, AND BUTTER 297
LXII. HOW MILK SOURS 302
LXIII. THE BABCOCK MILK-TESTER 304
CHAPTER XII. MISCELLANEOUS
LXIV. GROWING FEED STUFFS ON THE FARM 309
LXV. FARM TOOLS AND MACHINES 313
LXVI. LIMING THE LAND 315
LXVII. BIRDS 318
LXVIII. FARMING ON DRY LAND 323
LXIX. IRRIGATION 326
LXX. LIFE IN THE COUNTRY 330
APPENDIX 339
GLOSSARY 342
INDEX 351
TO THE TEACHER
Teachers sometimes shrink from undertaking the teaching of a simple
textbook on agriculture because they are not familiar with all the
processes of farming. By the same reasoning they might hesitate to teach
arithmetic because they do not know calculus or to teach a primary
history of the United States because they are not versed in all history.
The art of farming is based on the sciences dealing with the growth of
plants and animals. This book presents in a simple way these fundamental
scientific truths and suggests some practices drawn from them. Hence,
even though many teachers may not have plowed or sowed or harvested,
such teachers need not be embarrassed in mastering and heartily
instructing a class in nature's primary laws.
If teachers realize how much the efficiency, comfort, and happiness of
their pupils will be increased throughout their lives from being taught
to cooeperate with nature and to take advantage of her wonderful laws,
they will eagerly begin this study. They will find also that their
pupils will be actively interested in these studies bearing on their
daily lives, and this interest will be carried over to other subjects.
Whenever you can, take the pupils into the field, the garden, the
orchard, and the dairy. Teach them to make experiments and to learn by
the use of their own eyes and brains. They will, if properly led,
astonish you by their efforts and growth.
You will find in the practical exercises many suggestions as to
experiments that you can make with your class or with individual
members. Do not neglect this first-hand teaching. It will be a delight
to your pupils. In many cases it will be best to finish the experiments
or observational work first, and later turn to the text to amplify the
pupil's knowledge.
Although the book is arranged in logical order, the teacher ought to
feel free to teach any topic in the season best suited to its study.
Omit any chapter or section that does not bear on your crops or does not
deal with conditions in your state.
The United States government and the different state experiment stations
publish hundreds of bulletins on agricultural subjects. These are sent
without cost, on application. It will be very helpful to get such of
these bulletins as bear on the different sections of the book. These
will be valuable additions to your school library. The authors would
like to give a list of these bulletins bearing on each chapter, but it
would soon be out of date, for the bulletins get out of print and are
supplanted by newer ones. However, the United States Department of
Agriculture prints a monthly list of its publications, and each state
experiment station keeps a list of its bulletins. A note to the
Secretary of Agriculture, Washington, D.C., or to your own state
experiment station will promptly bring you these lists, and from them
you can select what you need for your school.
AGRICULTURE FOR BEGINNERS
CHAPTER I
THE SOIL
SECTION I. ORIGIN OF THE SOIL
The word _soil_ occurs many times in this little book. In agriculture
this word is used to describe the thin layer of surface earth that, like
some great blanket, is tucked around the wrinkled and age-beaten form of
our globe. The harder and colder earth under this surface layer is
called the _subsoil_. It should be noted, however, that in waterless and
sun-dried regions there seems little difference between the soil and the
subsoil.
Plants, insects, birds, beasts, men,--all alike are fed on what grows in
this thin layer of soil. If some wild flood in sudden wrath could sweep
into the ocean this earth-wrapping soil, food would soon become as
scarce as it was in Samaria when mothers ate their sons. The face of the
earth as we now see it, daintily robed in grass, or uplifting waving
acres of corn, or even naked, water-scarred, and disfigured by man's
neglect, is very different from what it was in its earliest days. How
was it then? How was the soil formed?
Learned men think that at first the surface of the earth was solid rock.
How was this rock changed into workable soil? Occasionally a curious boy
picks up a rotten stone, squeezes it, and finds his hands filled with
dirt, or soil. Now, just as the boy crumbled with his fingers this
single stone, the great forces of nature with boundless patience
crumbled, or, as it is called, disintegrated, the early rock mass. The
simple but giant-strong agents that beat the rocks into powder with a
clublike force a millionfold more powerful than the club force of
Hercules were chiefly (1) heat and cold; (2) water, frost, and ice; (3)
a very low form of vegetable life; and (4) tiny animals--if such minute
bodies can be called animals. In some cases these forces acted singly;
in others, all acted together to rend and crumble the unbroken stretch
of rock. Let us glance at some of the methods used by these skilled
soil-makers.
Heat and cold are working partners. You already know that most hot
bodies shrink, or contract, on cooling. The early rocks were hot. As the
outside shell of rock cooled from exposure to air and moisture it
contracted. This shrinkage of the rigid rim of course broke many of the
rocks, and here and there left cracks, or fissures. In these fissures
water collected and froze. As freezing water expands with irresistible
power, the expansion still further broke the rocks to pieces. The
smaller pieces again, in the same way, were acted on by frost and ice
and again crumbled. This process is still a means of soil-formation.
Running water was another giant soil-former. If you would understand its
action, observe some usually sparkling stream just after a washing rain.
The clear waters are discolored by mud washed in from the surrounding
hills. As though disliking their muddy burden, the waters strive to
throw it off. Here, as low banks offer chance, they run out into
shallows and drop some of it. Here, as they pass a quiet pool, they
deposit more. At last they reach the still water at the mouth of the
stream, and there they leave behind the last of their mud load, and
often form of it little three-sided islands called _deltas_. In the same
way mighty rivers like the Amazon, the Mississippi, and the Hudson, when
they are swollen by rain, bear great quantities of soil in their sweep
to the seas. Some of the soil they scatter over the lowlands as they
whirl seaward; the rest they deposit in deltas at their mouths. It is
estimated that the Mississippi carries to the ocean each year enough
soil to cover a square mile of surface to a depth of two hundred and
sixty-eight feet.
[Illustration: FIG. 1. ROCK MARKED BY THE SCRAPING OF A GLACIER OVER IT]
The early brooks and rivers, instead of bearing mud, ran oceanward
either bearing ground stone that they themselves had worn from the rocks
by ceaseless fretting, or bearing stones that other forces had already
dislodged. The large pieces were whirled from side to side and beaten
against one another or against bedrock until they were ground into
smaller and smaller pieces. The rivers distributed this rock soil just
as the later rivers distribute muddy soil. For ages the moving waters
ground against the rocks. Vast were the waters; vast the number of
years; vast the results.
Glaciers were another soil-producing agent. Glaciers are streams "frozen
and moving slowly but irresistibly onwards, down well-defined valleys,
grinding and pulverizing the rock masses detached by the force and
weight of their attack." Where and how were these glaciers formed?
Once a great part of upper North America was a vast sheet of ice.
Whatever moisture fell from the sky fell as snow. No one knows what made
this long winter of snow, but we do know that snows piled on snows until
mountains of white were built up. The lower snow was by the pressure of
that above it packed into ice masses. By and by some change of climate
caused the masses of ice to break up somewhat and to move south and
west. These moving masses, carrying rock and frozen earth, ground them
to powder. King thus describes the stately movement of these snow
mountains: "Beneath the bottom of this slowly moving sheet of ice, which
with more or less difficulty kept itself conformable with the face of
the land over which it was riding, the sharper outstanding points were
cut away and the deeper river canons filled in. Desolate and rugged
rocky wastes were thrown down and spread over with rich soil."
The joint action of air, moisture, and frost was still another agent of
soil-making. This action is called _weathering_. Whenever you have
noticed the outside stones of a spring-house, you have noticed that tiny
bits are crumbling from the face of the stones, and adding little by
little to the soil. This is a slow way of making additions to the soil.
It is estimated that it would take 728,000 years to wear away limestone
rock to a depth of thirty-nine inches. But when you recall the
countless years through which the weather has striven against the rocks,
you can readily understand that its never-wearying activity has added
immensely to the soil.
In the rock soil formed in these various ways, and indeed on the rocks
themselves, tiny plants that live on food taken from the air began to
grow. They grew just as you now see mosses and lichens grow on the
surface of rocks. The decay of these plants added some fertility to the
newly formed soil. The life and death of each succeeding generation of
these lowly plants added to the soil matter accumulating on the rocks.
Slowly but unceasingly the soil increased in depth until higher
vegetable forms could flourish and add their dead bodies to it. This
vegetable addition to the soil is generally known as _humus_.
[Illustration: FIG. 2. GROUND ROCK AT END OF A GLACIER]
In due course of time low forms of animal life came to live on these
plants, and in turn by their work and their death to aid in making a
soil fit for the plowman.
Thus with a deliberation that fills man with awe, the powerful forces of
nature splintered the rocks, crumbled them, filled them with plant food,
and turned their flinty grains into a soft, snug home for vegetable
life.
SECTION II. TILLAGE OF THE SOIL
A good many years ago a man by the name of Jethro Tull lived in England.
He was a farmer and a most successful man in every way. He first taught
the English people and the world the value of thorough tillage of the
soil. Before and during his time farmers did not till the soil very
intelligently. They simply prepared the seed-bed in a careless manner,
as a great many farmers do to-day, and when the crops were gathered the
yields were not large.
Jethro Tull centered attention on the important fact that careful and
thorough tillage increases the available plant food in the soil. He did
not know why his crops were better when the ground was frequently and
thoroughly tilled, but he knew that such tillage did increase his yield.
He explained the fact by saying, "Tillage is manure." We have since
learned the reason for the truth that Tull taught, and, while his
explanation was incorrect, the practice that he was following was
excellent. The stirring of the soil enables the air to circulate through
it freely, and permits a breaking down of the compounds that contain the
elements necessary to plant growth.
You have seen how the air helps to crumble the stone and brick in old
buildings. It does the same with soil if permitted to circulate freely
through it. The agent of the air that chiefly performs this work is
called carbonic acid gas, and this gas is one of the greatest helpers
the farmer has in carrying on his work. We must not forget that in soil
preparation the air is just as important as any of the tools and
implements used in cultivation.
[Illustration: FIG. 3. SLOPE TO WATER SHOWS SOIL WEATHERED FROM FACE
OF CLIFF]
If the soil is fertile and if deep plowing has always been done, good
crops will result, other conditions being favorable. If, however, the
tillage is poor, scanty harvests will always result. For most soils a
two-horse plow is necessary to break up and pulverize the land.
A shallow soil can always be improved by properly deepening it. The
principle of greatest importance in soil-preparation is the gradual
deepening of the soil in order that plant-roots may have more
comfortable homes. If the farmer has been accustomed to plow but four
inches deep, he should adjust the plow so as to turn five inches at the
next plowing, then six, and so on until the seed-bed is nine or ten
inches deep. This gradual deepening will not injure the soil but will
put it quickly in good condition. If to good tillage rotation of crops
be added, the soil will become more fertile with each succeeding year.
[Illustration: FIG. 4. MIXED GRASSES GROWN FOR FORAGE]
The plow, harrow, and roller are all necessary to good tillage and to a
proper preparation of the seed-bed. The soil must be made compact and
clods of all sizes must be crushed. Then the air circulates freely, and
paying crops are the rule and not the exception.
Tillage does these things: it increases the plant-food supply, destroys
weeds, and influences the moisture content of the soil.
=EXERCISE=
1. What tools are used in tillage?
2. How should a poor and shallow soil be treated?
3. Why should a poor and shallow soil be well compacted before
sowing the crop?
4. Explain the value of a circulation of air in the soil.
5. What causes iron to rust?
6. Why is a two-horse turning-plow better than a one-horse plow?
7. Where will clods do the least harm--on top of the soil or below
the surface?
8. Do plant roots penetrate clods?
9. Are earthworms a benefit or an injury to the soil?
10. Name three things that tillage does.
SECTION III. THE MOISTURE OF THE SOIL
Did any one ever explain to you how important water is to the soil, or
tell you why it is so important? Often, as you know, crops entirely fail
because there is not enough water in the soil for the plants to drink.
How necessary is it, then, that the soil be kept in the best possible
condition to catch and hold enough water to carry the plant through dry,
hot spells! Perhaps you are ready to ask, "How does the mouthless plant
drink its stored-up water?"
The plant gets all its water through its roots. You have seen the tiny
threadlike roots of a plant spreading all about in fine soil; they are
down in the ground taking up plant food and water for the stalk and
leaves above. The water, carrying plant food with it, rises in a simple
but peculiar way through the roots and stems.
The plants use the food for building new tissue, that is, for growth.
The water passes out through the leaves into the air. When the summers
are dry and hot and there is but little water in the soil, the leaves
shrink up. This is simply a method they have of keeping the water from
passing too rapidly off into the air. I am sure you have seen the corn
blades all shriveled on very hot days. This shrinkage is nature's way of
diminishing the current of water that is steadily passing through the
plant.
A thrifty farmer will try to keep his soil in such good condition that
it will have a supply of water in it for growing crops when dry and hot
weather comes. He can do this by deep plowing, by subsoiling, by adding
any kind of decaying vegetable matter to the soil, and by growing crops
that can be tilled frequently.
The soil is a great storehouse for moisture. After the clouds have
emptied their waters into this storehouse, the water of the soil comes
to the surface, where it is evaporated into the air. The water comes to
the surface in just the same way that oil rises in a lamp-wick. This
rising of the water is called _capillarity_.
[Illustration: FIG. 5. AN ENLARGED VIEW OF A SECTION OF MOIST SOIL,
SHOWING AIR SPACES AND SOIL PARTICLES]
It is necessary to understand what is meant by this big word. If into a
pan of water you dip a glass tube, the water inside the tube rises above
the level of the water in the pan. The smaller the tube the higher will
the water rise. The greater rise inside is perhaps due to the fact that
the glass attracts the particles of water more than the particles of
water attract one another. Now apply this principle to the soil.
[Illustration: FIG. 6. THE RIGHT WAY TO PLOW]
The soil particles have small spaces between them, and the spaces act
just as the tube does. When the water at the surface is carried away by
drying winds and warmth, the water deeper in the soil rises through
the soil spaces. In this way water is brought from its soil storehouse
as plants need it.
[Illustration: FIG. 7. APPARATUS FOR TESTING THE HOLDING OF WATER BY
DIFFERENT SOILS]
Of course when the underground water reaches the surface it evaporates.
If we want to keep it for our crops, we must prepare a trap to hold it.
Nature has shown us how this can be done. Pick up a plank as it lies on
the ground. Under the plank the soil is wet, while the soil not covered
by the plank is dry. Why? Capillarity brought the water to the surface,
and the plank, by keeping away wind and warmth, acted as a trap to hold
the moisture. Now of course a farmer cannot set a trap of planks over
his fields, but he can make a trap of dry earth, and that will do just
as well.
When a crop like corn or cotton or potatoes is cultivated, the fine,
loose dirt stirred by the cultivating-plow will make a mulch that serves
to keep water in the soil in the same way that the plank kept moisture
under it. The mulch also helps to absorb the rains and prevents the
water from running off the surface. Frequent cultivation, then, is one
of the best possible ways of saving moisture. Hence the farmer who most
frequently stirs his soil in the growing season, and especially in
seasons of drought, reaps, other things being equal, a more abundant
harvest than if tillage were neglected.
=EXERCISE=
1. Why is the soil wet under a board or under straw?
2. Will a soil that is fine and compact produce better crops than
one that is loose and cloddy? Why?
3. Since the water which a plant uses comes through the roots, can
the morning dew afford any assistance?
4. Why are weeds objectionable in a growing crop?
5. Why does the farmer cultivate growing corn and cotton?
SECTION IV. HOW THE WATER RISES IN THE SOIL
[Illustration: FIG. 8. USING LAMP-CHIMNEYS TO SHOW THE RISE OF WATER
IN SOIL]
When the hot, dry days of summer come, the soil depends upon the
subsoil, or undersoil, for the moisture that it must furnish its growing
plants. The water was stored in the soil during the fall, winter, and
spring months when there was plenty of rain. If you dig down into the
soil when everything is dry and hot, you will soon reach a cool, moist
undersoil. The moisture increases as you dig deeper into the soil.
Now the roots of plants go down into the soil for this moisture, because
they need the water to carry the plant food up into the stems and
leaves.
You can see how the water rises in the soil by performing a simple
experiment.
=EXPERIMENT=
Take a lamp-chimney and fill it with fine, dry dirt. The dirt from
a road or a field will do. Tie over the smaller end of the
lamp-chimney a piece of cloth or a pocket handkerchief, and place
this end in a shallow pan of water. If the soil in the lamp-chimney
is clay and well packed, the water will quickly rise to the top.
By filling three or four lamp-chimneys with as many different
soils, the pupil will see that the water rises more slowly in some
than in others.
Now take the water pan away, and the water in the lamp-chimneys
will gradually evaporate. Study for a few days the effect of
evaporation on the several soils.
SECTION V. DRAINING THE SOIL
A wise man was once asked, "What is the most valuable improvement ever
made in agriculture?" He answered, "Drainage." Often soils unfit for
crop-production because they contain too much water are by drainage
rendered the most valuable of farming lands.
Drainage benefits land in the following ways:
1. It deepens the subsoil by removing unnecessary water from the spaces
between the soil particles. This admits air. Then the oxygen which is in
the air, by aiding decay, prepares plant food for vegetation.
2. It makes the surface soil, or topsoil, deeper. It stands to reason
that the deeper the soil the more plant food becomes available for plant
use.
3. It improves the texture of the soil. Wet soil is sticky. Drainage
makes this sticky soil crumble and fall apart.
4. It prevents washing.
5. It increases the porosity of soils and permits roots to go deeper
into the soil for food and moisture.
6. It increases the warmth of the soil.
7. It permits earlier working in spring and after rains.
[Illustration: FIG. 9. LAYING A TILE DRAIN]
8. It favors the growth of germs which change the unavailable nitrogen
of the soil into nitrates; that is, into the form of nitrogen most
useful to plants.
9. It enables plants to resist drought better because the roots go into
the ground deeper early in the season.
A soil that is hard and wet will not grow good crops. The
nitrogen-gathering crops will store the greatest quantity of nitrogen in
the soil when the soil is open to the free circulation of the air.
These valuable crops cannot do this when the soil is wet and cold.
Sandy soils with sandy subsoils do not often need drainage; such soils
are naturally drained. With clay soils it is different. It is very
important to remove the stagnant water in them and to let the air in.
When land has been properly drained the other steps in improvement are
easily taken. After soil has been dried and mellowed by proper drainage,
then commercial fertilizers, barnyard manure, cowpeas, and clover can
most readily do their great work of improving the texture of the soil
and of making it fitter for plant growth.
[Illustration: FIG. 10. A TILE IN POSITION]
=Tile Drains.= Tile drains are the best and cheapest that can be used.
It would not be too strong to say that draining by tiles is the most
perfect drainage. Thousands of practical tests in this country have
proved the superiority of tile draining for the following reasons:
1. Good tile drains properly laid last for years and do not fill up.
2. They furnish the cheapest possible means of removing too much water
from the soil.
3. They are out of reach of all cultivating tools.
4. Surface water in filtering through the tiles leaves its nutritious
elements for plant growth.
=EXPERIMENTS=
=To show the Effect of Drainage.= Take two tomato cans and fill
both with the same kind of soil. Punch several holes in the bottom
of one to drain the soil above and to admit air circulation. Leave
the other unpunctured. Plant seeds of any kind in both cans and
keep in a warm place. Add every third day equal quantities of
water. Let seeds grow in both cans and observe the difference in
growth for two or three weeks.
=To show the Effect of Air in Soils.= Take two tomato cans; fill
one with soil that is loose and warm, and the other with wet clay
or muck from a swampy field. Plant a few seeds of the same kind in
each and observe how much better the dry, warm, open soil is for
growing farm crops.
SECTION VI. IMPROVING THE SOIL
We hear a great deal about the exhaustion or wearing out of the soil.
Many uncomfortable people are always declaring that our lands will no
longer produce profitable crops, and hence that farming will no longer
pay.
Now it is true, unfortunately, that much land has been robbed of its
fertility, and, because this is true, we should be most deeply
interested in everything that leads to the improvement of our soils.
When our country was first discovered and trees were growing everywhere,
we had virgin soils, or new soils that were rich and productive because
they were filled with vegetable matter and plant food. There are not
many virgin soils now because the trees have been cut from the best
lands, and these lands have been farmed so carelessly that the vegetable
matter and available plant food have been largely used up. Now that
fresh land is scarce it is very necessary to restore fertility to these
exhausted lands. What are some of the ways in which this can be done?
[Illustration: FIG. 11. CLOVER IS A SOIL-IMPROVER]
There are several things to be done in trying to reclaim worn-out land.
One of the first of these is to till the land well. Many of you may have
heard the story of the dying father who called his sons about him and
whispered feebly, "There is great treasure hidden in the garden." The
sons could hardly wait to bury their dead father before, thud, thud,
thud, their picks were going in the garden. Day after day they dug; they
dug deep; they dug wide. Not a foot of the crop-worn garden escaped the
probing of the pick as the sons feverishly searched for the expected
treasure. But no treasure was found. Their work seemed entirely useless.
[Illustration: FIG. 12. INCREASING THE PRODUCTIVE POWER OF THE SOIL
Second crop of cowpeas on old, abandoned land]
"Let us not lose every whit of our labor; let us plant this pick-scarred
garden," said the eldest. So the garden was planted. In the fall the
hitherto neglected garden yielded a harvest so bountiful, so unexpected,
that the meaning of their father's words dawned upon them. "Truly," they
said, "a treasure was hidden there. Let us seek it in all our fields."
The story applies as well to-day as it did when it was first told.
Thorough culture of the soil, frequent and intelligent tillage--these
are the foundations of soil-restoration.
Along with good tillage must go crop-rotation and good drainage. A
supply of organic matter will prevent heavy rains from washing the soil
and carrying away plant food. Drainage will aid good tillage in allowing
air to circulate between the soil particles and in arranging plant food
so that plants can use it.
But we must add humus, or vegetable matter, to the soil. You remember
that the virgin soils contained a great deal of vegetable matter and
plant food, but by the continuous growing of crops like wheat, corn, and
cotton, and by constant shallow tillage, both humus and plant food have
been used up. Consequently much of our cultivated soil to-day is hard
and dead.
There are three ways of adding humus and plant food to this lifeless
land: the first way is to apply barnyard manure (to adopt this method
means that livestock raising must be a part of all farming); the second
way is to adopt rotation of crops, and frequently to plow under crops
like clover and cowpeas; the third way is to apply commercial
fertilizers.
To summarize: if we want to make our soil better year by year, we must
cultivate well, drain well, and in the most economical way add humus and
plant food.
=EXPERIMENT=
Select a small area of ground at your home and divide it into four
sections, as shown in the following sketch:
On Section _A_ apply barnyard manure; on Section _B_ apply
commercial fertilizers; on Section _C_ apply nothing, but till
well; on Section _D_ apply nothing, and till very poorly.
_A_, _B_, and _C_ should all be thoroughly plowed and harrowed.
Then add barnyard manure to _A_, commercial fertilizers to _B_, and
harrow _A_, _B_, and _C_ at least four times until the soil is
mellow and fine. _D_ will most likely be cloddy, like many fields
that we often see. Now plant on each plat some crop like cotton,
corn, or wheat. When the plats are ready to harvest, measure the
yield of each and determine whether the increased yield of the best
plats has paid for the outlay for tillage and manure. The pupil
will be much interested in the results obtained from the first
crop.
[Illustration: FIG. 13]
Now follow a system of crop-rotation on the plats. Clover can
follow corn or cotton or wheat; and cowpeas, wheat. Then determine
the yield of each plat for the second crop. By following these
plats for several years, and increasing the number, the pupils will
learn many things of greatest value.
SECTION VII. MANURING THE SOIL
In the early days of our history, when the soil was new and rich, we
were not compelled to use large amounts of manures and fertilizers. Yet
our histories speak of an Indian named Squanto who came into one of the
New England colonies and showed the first settlers how, by putting a
fish in each hill of corn, they could obtain larger yields.
If people in those days, with new and fertile soils, could use manures
profitably, how much more ought we to use them in our time, when soils
have lost their virgin fertility, and when the plant food in the soil
has been exhausted by years and years of cropping!
To sell year after year all the produce grown on land is a sure way to
ruin it. If, for example, the richest land is planted every year in
corn, and no stable or farmyard manure or other fertilizer returned to
the soil, the land so treated will of course soon become too poor to
grow any crop. If, on the other hand, clover or alfalfa or corn or
cotton-seed meal is fed to stock, and the manure from the stock returned
to the soil, the land will be kept rich. Hence those farmers who do not
sell such raw products as cotton, corn, wheat, oats, and clover, but who
market articles made from these raw products, find it easier to keep
their land fertile. For illustration: if instead of selling hay, farmers
feed it to sheep and sell meat and wool; if instead of selling cotton
seed, they feed its meal to cows, and sell milk and butter; if instead
of selling stover, they feed it to beef cattle, they get a good price
for products and in addition have all the manure needed to keep their
land productive and increase its value each year.
[Illustration:FIG. 14. RELATION OF HUMUS TO GROWTH OF CORN
1, clay subsoil; 2, same, with fertilizer; 3, same, with humus]
If we wish to keep up the fertility of our lands we should not allow
anything to be lost from our farms. All the manures, straw, roots,
stubble, healthy vines--in fact everything decomposable--should be
plowed under or used as a top-dressing. Especial care should be taken in
storing manure. It should be watchfully protected from sun and rain. If
a farmer has no shed under which to keep his manure, he should scatter
it on his fields as fast as it is made.
[Illustration: FIG. 15. THE COTTON PLANT WITH AND WITHOUT FOOD
In left top pot, no plant food; in left bottom pot, plant food scanty;
in both right pots, all elements of plant food present]
He should understand also that liquid manure is of more value than
solid, because that important plant food, nitrogen, is found almost
wholly in the liquid portion. Some of the phosphoric acid and
considerable amounts of the potash are also found in the liquid manure.
Hence economy requires that none of this escape either by leakage or by
fermentation. Sometimes one can detect the smell of ammonia in the
stable. This ammonia is formed by the decomposition of the liquid
manure, and its loss should be checked by sprinkling some floats, acid
phosphate, or muck over the stable floor.
Many farmers find it desirable to buy fertilizers to use with the manure
made on the farm. In this case it is helpful to understand the
composition, source, and availability of the various substances
composing commercial fertilizers. The three most valuable things in
commercial fertilizers are nitrogen, potash, and phosphoric acid.
The nitrogen is obtained from (1) nitrate of soda mined in Chile, (2)
ammonium sulphate, a by-product of the gas works, (3) dried blood and
other by-products of the slaughter-houses, and (4) cotton-seed meal.
Nitrate of soda is soluble in water and may therefore be washed away
before being used by plants. For this reason it should be applied in
small quantities and at intervals of a few weeks.
Potash is obtained in Germany, where it is found in several forms. It is
put on the market as muriate of potash, sulphate of potash, kainite,
which contains salt as an impurity, and in other impure forms. Potash is
found also in _unleached_ wood ashes.
Phosphoric acid is found in various rocks of Tennessee, Florida, and
South Carolina, and also to a large extent in bones. The rocks or bones
are usually treated with sulphuric acid. This treatment changes the
phosphoric acid into a form ready for plant use.
These three kinds of plant food are ordinarily all that we need to
supply. In some cases, however, lime has to be added. Besides being a
plant food itself, lime helps most soils by improving the structure of
the grains; by sweetening the soil, thereby aiding the little living
germs called _bacteria_; by hastening the decay of organic matter; and
by setting free the potash that is locked up in the soil.
CHAPTER II
THE SOIL AND THE PLANT
SECTION VIII. ROOTS
[Illustration: FIG. 16. ROOT-HAIRS ON A RADISH]
You have perhaps observed the regularity of arrangement in the twigs and
branches of trees. Now pull up the roots of a plant, as, for example,
sheep sorrel, Jimson weed, or some other plant. Note the branching of
the roots. In these there is no such regularity as is seen in the twig.
Trace the rootlets to their finest tips. How small, slender, and
delicate they are! Still we do not see the finest of them, for in taking
the plant from the ground we tore the most delicate away. In order to
see the real construction of a root we must grow one so that we may
examine it uninjured. To do this, sprout some oats in a germinator or in
any box in which one glass side has been arranged and allow the oats to
grow till they are two or more inches high. Now examine the roots and
you will see very fine hairs, similar to those shown in the accompanying
figure, forming a fuzz over the surface of the roots near the tips. This
fuzz is made of small hairs standing so close together that there are
often as many as 38,200 on a single square inch. Fig. 17 shows how a
root looks when it has been cut crosswise into what is known as a cross
section. The figure is much increased in size. You can see how the
root-hairs extend from the root in every direction. Fig. 18 shows a
single root-hair very greatly enlarged, with particles of sand sticking
to it.
[Illustration: FIG. 17. A SLICE OF A ROOT
Highly magnified]
These hairs are the feeding-organs of the roots, and they are formed
only near the tips of the finest roots. You see that the large, coarse
roots that you are familiar with have nothing to do with _absorbing_
plant food from the soil. They serve merely to _conduct_ the sap and
nourishment from the root-hairs to the tree.
When you apply manure or other fertilizer to a tree, remember that it is
far better to supply the fertilizer to the roots that are at some
distance from the trunk, for such roots are the real feeders. The plant
food in the manure soaks into the soil and immediately reaches the
root-hairs. You can understand this better by studying the distribution
of the roots of an orchard tree, shown in Fig. 19. There you can see
that the fine tips are found at a long distance from the main trunk.
[Illustration: FIG. 18. A ROOT-HAIR WITH PARTICLES OF SOIL STICKING
TO IT]
You can now readily see why it is that plants usually wilt when they are
transplanted. The fine, delicate root-hairs are then broken off, and the
plant can but poorly keep up its food and water supply until new hairs
have been formed. While these are forming, water has been evaporating
from the leaves, and consequently the plant does not get enough moisture
and therefore droops.
[Illustration: FIG. 19. DISTRIBUTION OF APPLE-TREE ROOTS]
Would you not conclude that it is very poor farming to till deeply any
crop after the roots have extended between the rows far enough to be cut
by the plow or cultivator? In cultivating between corn rows, for
example, if you find that you are disturbing fine roots, you may be sure
that you are breaking off millions of root-hairs from each plant and
hence are doing harm rather than good. Fig. 20 shows how the roots from
one corn row intertangle with those of another. You see at a glance how
many of these roots would be destroyed by deep cultivation. Stirring
the upper inch of soil when the plants are well grown is sufficient
tillage and does no injury to the roots.
[Illustration: FIG. 20. CORN ROOTS REACH FROM ROW TO ROW]
A deep soil is much better than a shallow soil, as its depth makes it
just so much easier for the roots to seek deep food. Fig. 21 illustrates
well how far down into the soil the alfalfa roots go.
[Illustration: FIG. 21 ALFALFA ROOT]
=EXERCISE=
Dig up the roots of several cultivated plants and weeds and compare
them. Do you find some that are fine or fibrous? some fleshy like
the carrot? The dandelion is a good example of a tap-root.
Tap-roots are deep feeders. Examine very carefully the roots of a
medium-sized corn plant. Sift the dirt away gently so as to loosen
as few roots as possible. How do the roots compare in area with the
part above the ground? Try to trace a single root of the corn plant
from the stalk to its very tip. How long are the roots of mature
plants? Are they deep or shallow feeders? Germinate some oats or
beans in a glass-sided box, as suggested, and observe the
root-hairs.
SECTION IX. HOW THE PLANT FEEDS FROM THE SOIL
Plants receive their nourishment from two sources--from the air and from
the soil. The soil food, or mineral food, dissolved in water, must reach
the plant through the root-hairs with which all plants are provided in
great numbers. Each of these hairs may be compared to a finger reaching
among the particles of earth for food and water. If we examine the
root-hairs ever so closely, we find no holes, or openings, in them. It
is evident, then, that no solid particles can enter the root-hairs, but
that all food must pass into the root in solution.
An experiment just here will help us to understand how a root feeds.
[Illustration: FIG. 22. EXPERIMENT TO SHOW HOW ROOTS TAKE UP FOOD]
=EXPERIMENT=
Secure a narrow glass tube like the one in Fig. 22. If you cannot
get a tube, a narrow, straight lamp-chimney will, with a little
care, do nearly as well. From a bladder made soft by soaking, cut a
piece large enough to cover the end of the tube or chimney and to
hang over a little all around. Make the piece of bladder secure to
the end of the tube by wrapping tightly with a waxed thread, as at
B. Partly fill the tube with molasses (or it may be easier in case
you use a narrow tube to fill it before attaching the bladder). Put
the tube into a jar or bottle of water so placed that the level of
the molasses inside and the water outside will be the same. Fasten
the tube in this position and observe it frequently for three or
four hours. At the end of the time you should find that the
molasses in the tube has risen above the level of the liquid
outside. It may even overflow at the top. If you use the
lamp-chimney the rise will not be so clearly seen, since a greater
volume is required to fill the space in the chimney. This increase
in the contents of the tube is due to the entrance of water from
the outside. The water has passed through the thin bladder, or
membrane, and has come to occupy space in the tube. There is also a
passage the other way, but the molasses can pass through the
bladder membrane so slowly that the passage is scarcely noticeable.
There are no holes, or openings, in the membrane, but still there
is a free passage of liquids in both directions, although the more
heavily laden solution must move more slowly.
A root-hair acts in much the same way as the tube in our experiment,
with the exception that it is so made as to allow certain substances to
pass in only one direction, that is, toward the inside. The outside of
the root-hair is bathed in solutions rich in nourishment. The
nourishment passes from the outside to the inside through the delicate
membrane of the root-hair. Thus does food enter the plant-root. From the
root-hairs, foods are carried to the inside of the root.
From this you can see how important it is for a plant to have fine,
loose soil for its root-hairs; also how necessary is the water in the
soil, since the food can be used only when it is dissolved in water.
This passage of liquids from one side of a membrane to another is called
_osmosis_. It has many uses in the plant kingdom. We say a root takes
nourishment by osmosis.
SECTION X. ROOT-TUBERCLES
Tubercle is a big word, but you ought to know how to pronounce it and
what is meant by root-tubercles. We are going to tell you what a
root-tubercle is and something about its importance to agriculture. When
you have learned this, we are sure you will want to examine some plants
for yourself in order that you may see just what tubercles look like on
a real root.
Root-tubercles do not form on all kinds of plants that farmers grow.
They are formed only on those kinds that botanists call _legumes_. The
clovers, cowpeas, vetches, soy beans, and alfalfa are all legumes. The
tubercles are little knotty, wart-like growths on the roots of the
plants just named. These tubercles are caused by tiny forms of life
called, as you perhaps already know, bacteria, or _germs_.
[Illustration: FIG. 23. TUBERCLES ON CLOVER ROOTS
The specimen at the right was grown in soil inoculated with soil from an
old clover field. The one at the left was grown in soil not inoculated]
Instead of living in nests in trees like birds or in the ground like
moles and worms, these tiny germs, less than one twenty-five thousandth
of an inch long, make their homes on the roots of legumes. Nestling
snugly together, they live, grow, and multiply in their sunless homes.
Through their activity the soil is enriched by the addition of much
nitrogen from the air. They are the good fairies of the farmer, and no
magician's wand ever blessed a land so much as these invisible folk
bless the land that they live in.
Just as bees gather honey from the flowers and carry it to the hives,
where they prepare it for their own future use and for the use of
others, so do these root-tubercles gather nitrogen from the air and fix
it in their root homes, where it can be used by other crops.
[Illustration: FIG. 24. SOY BEANS AND COWPEAS, TWO GREAT SOIL-IMPROVERS]
In the earlier pages of this book you were told something about the food
of plants. One of the main elements of plant food, perhaps you remember,
is nitrogen. Just as soon as the roots of the leguminous plants begin to
push down into the soil, the bacteria, or germs that make the tubercles,
begin to build their homes on the roots, and in so doing they add
nitrogen to the soil. You now see the importance of growing such crops
as peas and clover on your land, for by their tubercles you can
constantly add plant food to the soil. Now this much-needed nitrogen is
the most costly part of the fertilizers that farmers buy every year. If
every farmer, then, would grow these tubercle-bearing crops, he would
rapidly add to the richness of his land and at the same time escape the
necessity of buying so much expensive fertilizer.
=EXPERIMENT=
Take a spade or shovel and dig carefully around the roots of a
cowpea and a clover plant; loosen the earth thoroughly and then
pull the plants up, being careful not to break off any of the
roots. Now wash the roots, and after they become dry count the
nodules, or tubercles, on them. Observe the difference in size. How
are they arranged? Do all leguminous plants have equal numbers of
nodules? How do these nodules help the farmer?
SECTION XI. THE ROTATION OF CROPS
Doubtless you know what is meant by rotation, for your teacher has
explained to you already how the earth rotates, or turns, on its axis
and revolves around the sun. When we speak of crop-rotation we mean not
only that the same crop should not be planted on the same land for two
successive years but that crops should follow one another in a regular
order.
Many farmers do not follow a system of farming that involves a change of
crops. In some parts of the country the same fields are planted to corn
or wheat or cotton year after year. This is not a good practice and
sooner or later will wear out the soil completely, because the
soil-elements that furnish the food of that constant crop are soon
exhausted and good crop-production is no longer possible.
Why is crop-rotation so necessary? There are different kinds of plant
food in the soil. If any one of these is used up, the soil of course
loses its power to feed plants properly. Now each crop uses more of some
of the different kinds of foods than others do, just as you like some
kinds of food better than others. But the crop cannot, as you can, learn
to use the kinds of food it does not like; it must use the kind that
nature fitted it to use. Not only do different crops feed upon different
soil foods, but they use different quantities of these foods.
Now if a farmer plant the same crop in the same field each year, that
crop soon uses up all of the available plant food that it likes. Hence
the soil can no longer properly nourish the crop that has been year by
year robbing it. If that crop is to be successfully grown again on the
land, the exhausted element must be restored.
[Illustration: FIG. 25. GRASS FOLLOWING CORN]
This can be done in two ways: first, by finding out what element has
here been exhausted, and then restoring this element by means either of
commercial fertilizers or manure; second, by planting on the land crops
that feed on different food and that will allow or assist kind Mother
Nature "to repair her waste places." An illustration may help you to
remember this fact. Nitrogen is, as already explained, one of the
commonest plant foods. It may almost be called plant bread. The wheat
crop uses up a good deal of nitrogen. Suppose a field were planted in
wheat year after year. Most of the available nitrogen would be taken out
of the soil after a while, and a new wheat crop, if planted on the
field, would not get enough of its proper food to yield a paying
harvest. This same land, however, that could not grow wheat could
produce other crops that do not require so much nitrogen. For example,
it could grow cowpeas. Cowpeas, aided by their root-tubercles, are able
to gather from the air a great part of the nitrogen needed for their
growth. Thus a good crop of peas can be obtained even if there is little
available nitrogen in the soil. On the other hand wheat and corn and
cotton cannot use the free nitrogen of the air, and they suffer if there
is an insufficient quantity present in the soil; hence the necessity of
growing legumes to supply what is lacking.
[Illustration: FIG. 26. COWPEAS AND CORN--AUGUST]
Let us now see how easily plant food may be saved by the rotation of
crops.
If you sow wheat in the autumn it is ready to be harvested in time for
planting cowpeas. Plow or disk the wheat stubble, and sow the same field
to cowpeas. If the wheat crop has exhausted the greater part of the
nitrogen of the soil, it makes no difference to the cowpea; for the
cowpea will get its nitrogen from the air and not only provide for its
own growth but will leave quantities of nitrogen in the queer nodules of
its roots for the crops coming after it in the rotation.
[Illustration: FIG. 27. COWPEAS AND CORN--OCTOBER]
If corn be planted, there should be a rotation in just the same way. The
corn plant, a summer grower, of course uses a certain portion of the
plant food stored in the soil. In order that the crop following the corn
may feed on what the corn did not use, this crop should be one that
requires a somewhat different food. Moreover, it should be one that fits
in well with corn so as to make a winter crop. We find just such a
plant in clover or wheat. Like the cowpea, all the varieties of clover
have on their roots tubercles that add the important element, nitrogen,
to the soil.
From these facts is it not clear that if you wish to improve your land
quickly and keep it always fruitful you must practice crop-rotation?
AN ILLUSTRATION OF CROP-ROTATION
Here are two systems of crop-rotation as practiced at one or more
agricultural experiment stations. Each furnishes an ideal plan for
keeping up land.
---------------------++----------------------++----------------------
FIRST YEAR || SECOND YEAR || THIRD YEAR
----------+----------++-----------+----------++-----------+----------
Summer | Winter || Summer | Winter || Summer | Winter
Corn | Crimson || Cotton | Wheat || Cowpeas | Rye for
| clover || | || | pasture
Corn | Wheat || Clover | Clover || Grass | Grass for
| || and grass | and grass|| |pasture or
| || | || | meadow
In these rotations the cowpeas and clovers are nitrogen-gathering crops.
They not only furnish hay but they enrich the soil. The wheat, corn, and
cotton are money crops, but in addition they are cultivated crops; hence
they improve the physical condition of the soil and give opportunity to
kill weeds. The grasses and clovers are of course used for pasturage and
hay. This is only a suggested rotation. Work out one that will meet your
home need.
=EXERCISE=
Let the pupils each present a system of rotation that includes the
crops raised at home. The system presented should as nearly as
possible meet the following requirements:
1. Legumes for gathering nitrogen.
2. Money crops for cash income.
3. Cultivated crops for tillage and weed-destruction.
4. Food crops for feeding live stock.
CHAPTER III
THE PLANT
SECTION XII. HOW A PLANT FEEDS FROM THE AIR
If you partly burn a match you will see that it becomes black. This
black substance into which the match changes is called _carbon_. Examine
a fresh stick of charcoal, which is, as you no doubt know, burnt wood.
You see in the charcoal every fiber that you saw in the wood itself.
This means that every part of the plant contains carbon. How important,
then, is this substance to the plant!
You will be surprised to know that the total amount of carbon in plants
comes from the air. All the carbon that a plant gets is taken in by the
leaves of the plant; not a particle is gathered by the roots. A large
tree, weighing perhaps 11,000 pounds, requires in its growth carbon from
16,000,000 cubic yards of air.
Perhaps, after these statements, you may think there is danger that the
carbon of the air may sometime become exhausted. The air of the whole
world contains about 1,760,000,000,000 pounds of carbon. Moreover, this
is continually being added to by our fires and by the breath of animals.
When wood or coal is used for fuel the carbon of the burning substance
is returned to the air in the form of gas. Some large factories burn
great quantities of coal and thus turn much carbon back to the air. A
single factory in Germany is estimated to give back to the air daily
about 5,280,000 pounds of carbon. You see, then, that carbon is
constantly being put back into the air to replace that which is used by
growing plants.
The carbon of the air can be used by none but green plants, and by them
only in the sunlight. We may compare the green coloring matter of the
leaf to a machine, and the sunlight to the power, or energy, which keeps
the machine in motion. By means, then, of sunlight and the green
coloring matter of the leaves, the plant secures carbon. The carbon
passes into the plant and is there made into two foods very necessary to
the plant; namely, starch and sugar.
Sometimes the plant uses the starch and sugar immediately. At other
times it stores both away, as it does in the Irish and the sweet potato
and in beets, cabbage, peas, and beans. These plants are used as food by
man because they contain so much nourishment; that is, starch and sugar
which were stored away by the plant for its own future use.
=EXERCISE=
Examine some charcoal. Can you see the rings of growth? Slightly
char paper, cloth, meat, sugar, starch, etc. What does the turning
black prove? What per cent of these substances do you think is pure
carbon?
SECTION XIII. THE SAP CURRENT
The root-hairs take nourishment from the soil. The leaves manufacture
starch and sugar. These manufactured foods must be carried to all parts
of the plant. There are two currents to carry them. One passes from the
roots through the young wood to the leaves, and one, a downward current,
passes through the bark, carrying needed food to the roots (see Fig.
28).
If you should injure the roots, the water supply to the leaves would be
cut off and the leaves would immediately wither. On the other hand, if
you remove the bark, that is, girdle the tree, you in no way interfere
with the water supply and the leaves do not wither. Girdling does,
however, interfere with the downward food current through the bark.
[Illustration: FIG. 28 MOVEMENT OF THE SAP CURRENT]
If the tree be girdled the roots sooner or later suffer from lack of
food supply from the leaves. Owing to this food stoppage the roots will
cease to grow and will soon be unable to take in sufficient water, and
then the leaves will begin to droop. This, however, may not happen until
several months after the girdling. Sometimes a partly girdled branch
grows much in thickness just above the girdle, as is shown in Fig. 29.
This extra growth seems to be due to a stoppage of the rich supply of
food which was on its way to the roots through the bark. It could go no
farther and was therefore used by the tree to make an unnatural growth
at this point. You will now understand how and why trees die when they
are girdled to clear new ground.
[Illustration: FIG. 29. A THICKENING ABOVE THE WIRE THAT CAUSED THE
GIRDLING]
It is, then, the general law of sap-movement that the upward current
from the roots passes through the woody portion of the trunk, and that
the current bearing the food made by the leaves passes downward through
the bark.
=EXERCISE=
Let the teacher see that these and all other experiments are
performed by the pupils. Do not allow them to guess, but make them
see.
Girdle valueless trees or saplings of several kinds, cutting the
bark away in a complete circle around the tree. Do not cut into the
wood. How long before the tree shows signs of injury? Girdle a
single small limb on a tree. What happens? Explain.
SECTION XIV. THE FLOWER AND THE SEED
Some people think that the flowers by the wayside are for the purpose of
beautifying the world and increasing man's enjoyment. Do you think this
is true? Undoubtedly a flower is beautiful, and to be beautiful is one
of the uses of many flowers; but it is not the chief use of a flower.
You know that when peach or apple blossoms are nipped by the spring
frost the fruit crop is in danger. The fruit of the plant bears the
seed, and the flower produces the fruit. That is its chief duty.
[Illustration: FIG. 30. PARTS OF THE PISTIL]
Do you know any plant that produces seed without flowers? Some one
answers, "The corn, the elm, and the maple all produce seed, but have no
flower." No, that is not correct. If you look closely you will find in
the spring very small flowers on the elm and on the maple, while the ear
and the tassel are really the blossoms of the corn plant. Every plant
that produces seed has flowers, although they may sometimes seem very
curious flowers.
[Illustration: FIG. 31. A BUTTERCUP]
Let us see what a flower really is. Take, for example, a buttercup,
cotton, tobacco, or plum blossom (see Figs. 31 and 32). You will find on
the outside a row of green leaves inclosing the flower when it is still
a bud. These leaves are the _sepals_. Next on the inside is a row of
colored leaves, or _petals_. Arranged inside of the petals are some
threadlike parts, each with a knob on the end. These are the _stamens_.
Examine one stamen closely (Fig. 33). On the knob at its tip you should
find, if the flower is fully open, some fine grains, or powder. In the
lily this powder is so abundant that in smelling the flower you often
brush a quantity of it off on your nose. This substance is called
_pollen_, and the knob on the end of the stamen, on which the pollen is
borne, is the _anther_.
[Illustration: FIG. 32. A PLUM BLOSSOM]
The pollen is of very great importance to the flower. Without it there
could be no seeds. The stamens as pollen-bearers, then, are very
important. But there is another part to each flower that is of equal
value. This part you will find in the center of the flower, inside the
circle of stamens. It is called the _pistil_ (Fig. 32). The swollen tip
of the pistil is the _stigma_. The swollen base of the pistil forms the
_ovary_. If you carefully cut open this ovary you will find in it
very small immature seeds.
[Illustration: FIG. 33. STAMENS
_a_, anther; _f_, filament]
Some plants bear all these parts in the same flower; that is, each
blossom has stamens, pistil, petals, and sepals. The pear blossom and
the tomato blossom represent such flowers. Other plants bear their
stamens and pistils in separate blossoms. Stamens and pistils may even
occur in separate plants, and some blossoms have no sepals or petals at
all. Look at the corn plant. Here the tassel is a cluster of many
flowers, each of which bears only stamens. The ear is likewise a cluster
of many flowers, each of which bears only a pistil. The dust that you
see falling from the tassel is the pollen, and the long silky threads of
the ear are the stigmas.
[Illustration: FIG. 34. A TOMATO BLOSSOM]
Now no plant can bear seeds unless the pollen of the stamen falls on the
stigma. Corn cannot therefore form seed unless the dust of the tassel
falls upon the silk. Did you ever notice how poorly the cob is filled on
a single cornstalk standing alone in a field? Do you see why? It is
because when a plant stands alone the wind blows the pollen away from
the tassel, and little or none is received on the stigmas below.
[Illustration: FIG. 35. CUCUMBER BLOSSOMS]
In the corn plant the stamens and pistils are separate; that is, they do
not occur on the same flower, although they are on the same plant. This
is also true of the cucumber (see Fig. 35). In many plants, however,
such as the hemp, hop, sassafras, willow, and others, the staminate
parts are on one plant and the pistillate parts are on another. This is
also true in several other cultivated plants. For example, in some
strawberries the stamens are absent or useless; that is, they bear no
good pollen. In such cases the grower must see to it that near by are
strawberry plants that bear stamens, in order that those plants which do
not bear pollen may become _pollinated_; that is, may have pollen
carried to them. After the stigma has been supplied with pollen, a
single pollen grain sends a threadlike sprout down through the stigma
into the ovary. This process, if successfully completed, is called
_fertilization_.
=EXERCISE=
Examine several flowers and identify the parts named in the last
section. Try in the proper season to find the pollen on the maple,
willow, alder, and pine, and on wheat, cotton, and the
morning-glory.
How fast does the ovary of the apple blossom enlarge? Measure one
and watch it closely from day to day. Can you find any plants that
have their stamens and ovaries on separate individuals?
SECTION XV. POLLINATION
Nature has several interesting ways of bringing about pollination. In
the corn, willow, and pine the pollen is picked up by the wind and
carried away. Much of it is lost, but some reaches the stigmas, or
receptive parts, of other corn, willow, or pine flowers. This is a very
wasteful method, and all plants using it must provide much pollen.
Many plants employ a much better method. They have learned how to make
insects bear their pollen. In plants of this type the parts of the
blossom are so shaped and so placed as to deposit pollen from the stamen
on the insect and to receive pollen from the insect on the stigmas.
When you see the clumsy bumblebee clambering over and pushing his way
into a clover blossom, you may be sure that he is getting well dusted
with pollen and that the next blossom which he visits will secure a full
share on its stigmas.
When flowers fit themselves to be pollinated by insects they can no
longer use the wind and are helpless if insects do not visit them. They
therefore cunningly plan two ways to invite the visits of insects.
First, they provide a sweet nectar as a repast for the insect visitor.
The nectar is a sugary solution found in the bottom of the flower and is
used by the visitor as food or to make honey. Second, flowers advertise
to let each insect know that they have something for it. The advertising
is done either by showy colors or by perfume. Insects have wonderful
powers of smell. When you see showy flowers or smell fragrant ones, you
will know that such flowers are advertising the presence either of
nectar or of pollen (to make beebread) and that such flowers depend on
insects for pollination.
[Illustration: FIG. 36. BEES CARRYING POLLEN]
A season of heavy, cold rains during blossoming-time may often injure
the fruit crop by preventing insects from carrying pollen from flower to
flower. You now also understand why plants often fail to produce seeds
indoors. Since they are shut in, they cannot receive proper insect
visits. Plants such as tomatoes or other garden fruits dependent upon
insect pollination must, if raised in the greenhouse where insects
cannot visit them, be pollinated by hand.
=EXERCISE=
Exclude insect visitors from some flower or flower cluster, for
example, clover, by covering with a paper bag, and see whether the
flower can produce seeds that are capable of growing. Compare as to
number and vitality the seeds of such a flower with those of an
uncovered flower. Observe insects closely. Do you ever find pollen
on them? What kinds of insects visit the clover? the cowpea? the
sourwood? the flax? Is wheat pollinated by insects or by the wind
or by some other means? Do bees fly in rainy weather? How will a
long rainy season at blossoming-time affect the apple crop? Why?
Should bees be kept in an orchard? Why?
SECTION XVI. CROSSES, HYBRIDS, AND CROSS-POLLINATION
In our study of flowers and their pollination we have seen that the seed
is usually the descendant of two parents, or at least of two organs--one
the ovary, producing the seed; the other the pollen, which is necessary
to fertilize the ovary.
It happens that sometimes the pollen of one blossom fertilizes the ovary
of its own flower, but more often the pollen from one plant fertilizes
the ovary of another plant. This latter method is called
_cross-pollination_. As a rule cross-pollination makes seed that will
produce a better plant than simple pollination would. Cross-pollination
by hand is often used by plant-breeders when, for purposes of
seed-selection, a specially strong plant is desired. The steps in hand
pollination are as follows: (1) remove the anthers before they open, to
prevent them from pollinating the stigma (the steps in this process are
illustrated in Figs. 37, 38-39); (2) cover the flower thus treated with
a paper bag to prevent stray pollen from getting on it (see Fig. 40);
(3) when the ovary is sufficiently developed, carry pollen to the stigma
by hand from the anthers of another plant which you have selected to
furnish it, and rebag to keep out any stray pollen which might
accidentally get in; (4) collect the seeds when they are mature and
label them properly.
Hand pollination has this advantage--you know both parents of your seed.
If pollination occur naturally you know the maternal but have no means
of judging the paternal parent. You can readily see, therefore, how hand
pollination enables you to secure seed derived from two well-behaved
parents.
Sometimes we can breed one kind of plant on another. The result of such
cross-breeding is known as a _hybrid_. In the animal kingdom the mule is
a common example of this cross-breeding. Plant hybrids were formerly
called mules also, but this suggestive term is almost out of use.
[Illustration: FIG. 37
The bud on right at top is in proper condition for removal of anthers;
the anthers have been removed from the buds below]
It is only when plants of two distinct kinds are crossed that the result
is called a hybrid; for example, a blackjack oak on a white oak, an
apple on a pear. If the parent plants are closely related, for example,
two kinds of apples, the resulting plant is known simply as a _cross_.
Hybrids and crosses are valuable in that they usually differ from both
parents and yet combine some qualities of each.
[Illustration: FIG. 38. ORANGE BLOSSOM PREPARED FOR CROSSING
First, bud; second, anthers unremoved; third, anthers removed]
[Illustration: FIG. 39. TOMATO BLOSSOM READY TO CROSS
[Illustration: FIG. 40.
First, blossom bagged to keep out stray pollen; second, fruit bagged for
protection]
They often leave off some of the qualities of the parent
plants and at other times have such qualities more markedly than did
their parents. Thus they often produce an interesting new kind of plant.
Sometimes we are able by hybridization to combine in one plant the good
qualities of two other plants and thus make a great advance in
agriculture. The new forms brought about by hybridization may be fixed,
or made permanent, by such selection as is mentioned in Section XVIII.
Hybridization is of great aid in originating new plants.
It often happens that a plant will be more fruitful when pollinated by
one variety than by some other variety. This is well illustrated in Fig.
41. A fruit-grower or farmer should know much about these subjects
before selecting varieties for his orchard, vineyard, etc.
=EXERCISE=
With the help of your teacher try to cross some plants. Such an
experiment will take time, but will be most interesting. You must
remember that many crosses must be attempted in order to gain
success with even a few.
SECTION XVII. PROPAGATION BY BUDS
It is the business of the farmer to make plants grow, or, as it is
generally called, to propagate plants. This he does in one of two ways:
by buds (that is, by small pieces cut from parent plants), or by seeds.
The chief aim in both methods should be to secure in the most convenient
manner the best-paying plants.
Many plants are most easily and quickly propagated by buds; for example,
the grape, red raspberry, fig, and many others that we cultivate for the
flower only, such as the carnation, geranium, rose, and begonia.
[Illustration: FIG. 41.
Brighton pollinated by 1, Salem; 2, Creveling; 3, Lindley; 4, Brighton;
5, Self-pollinated; 6, Nectar; 7, Jefferson; 8, Niagara]
In growing plants from cuttings, a piece is taken from the kind of plant
that one wishes to grow. The greatest care must be exercised in order to
get a healthy cutting. If we take a cutting from a poor plant, what can
we expect but to grow a poor plant like the one from which our cutting
was taken? On the other hand, if a fine, strong, vigorous, fruitful
plant be selected, we shall expect to grow just such a fine, healthy,
fruitful plant.
We expect the cutting to make exactly the same variety of plant as the
parent stock. We must therefore decide on the variety of berry, grape,
fig, carnation, or rose that we wish to propagate, and then look for the
strongest and most promising plants of this variety within our reach.
The utmost care will not produce a fine plant if we start from poor
stock.
[Illustration: FIG. 42. GERANIUM CUTTING
Dotted line shows depth to which cutting should be planted]
What qualities are most desirable in a plant from which cuttings are to
be taken? First, it should be productive, hardy, and suited to your
climate and your needs; second, it should be healthy. Do not take
cuttings from a diseased plant, since the cutting may carry the
disease.
Cuttings may be taken from various parts of the plant, sometimes even
from parts of the leaf, as in the begonia (Fig. 46). More often,
however, they are drawn from parts of the stem (Figs. 43-45). As to the
age of the twig from which the cutting is to be taken, Professor Bailey
says: "For most plants the proper age or maturity of wood for the making
of cuttings may be determined by giving the twig a quick bend; if it
snaps and hangs by the bark, it is in proper condition. If it bends
without breaking, it is too young and soft or too old. If it splinters,
it is too old and woody." Some plants, as the geranium (Fig. 42),
succeed best if the cuttings from which they are grown are taken from
soft, young parts of the plant; others, for example, the grape or rose,
do better when the cutting is made from more mature wood.
[Illustration: FIG. 43 GRAPE CUTTING
Showing depth to which cutting should be planted]
[Illustration: FIG. 44. CARNATION CUTTING]
Cuttings may vary in size and may include one or more buds. After a
hardy, vigorous cutting is made, insert it about one half or one third
of its length in soil. A soil free from organic matter is much the best,
since in such soil the cuttings are much less liable to disease. A fine,
clean sand is commonly used by professional gardeners. When cuttings
have rooted well--this may require a month or more--they may be
transplanted to larger pots.
Sometimes, instead of cutting off a piece and rooting it, portions of
branches are made to root before they are separated from the parent
plant. This method is often followed, and is known as _layering_. It is
a simple process. Just bend the tip of a bough down and bury it in the
earth (see Fig. 47). The black raspberry forms layers naturally, but
gardeners often aid it by burying the over-hanging tips in the earth, so
that more tips may easily take root. Strawberries develop runners that
root themselves in a similar fashion.
Grafts and buds are really cuttings which, instead of being buried in
sand to produce roots of their own, are set on the roots of other
plants.
[Illustration: FIG. 45. ROSE CUTTING]
Grafting and budding are practiced when these methods are more
convenient than cuttings or when the gardener thinks there is danger of
failure to get plants to take root as cuttings. Neither grafting nor
budding is, however, necessary for the raspberry or the grape, for these
propagate most readily from cuttings.
It is often the case that a budded or grafted plant is more fruitful
than a plant on its own roots. In cases of this kind, of course, grafts
or buds are used.
The white, or Irish, potato is usually propagated from pieces of the
potato itself. Each piece used for planting bears one eye or more. The
potato itself is really an underground stem and the eyes are buds. This
method of propagation is therefore really a peculiar kind of cutting.
Since the eye is a bud and our potato plant for next year is to develop
from this bud, it is of much importance, as we have seen, to know
exactly what _kind_ of plant our potato comes from. If the potato is
taken from a small plant that had but a few poor potatoes in the hill,
we may expect the bud to produce a similar plant and a correspondingly
poor crop. We must see to it, then, that our seed potatoes are drawn
from vines that were good producers, because new potato plants are like
the plants from which they were grown. Of course when our potatoes are
in the bin we cannot tell from what kind of plants they came. We must
therefore _select our seed potatoes in the field_. Seed potatoes should
always be selected from those hills that produce most bountifully. Be
assured that the increased yield will richly repay this care in
selecting. It matters not so much whether the seed potato be large or
small; it must, however, come from a hill bearing a large yield of fine
potatoes.
[Illustration: FIG. 46. BEGONIA-LEAF CUTTING]
Sweet-potato plants are produced from shoots, or growing buds, taken
from the potato itself, so that in their case too the piece that we use
in propagating is a part of the original plant, and will therefore be
like it under similar conditions. Just as with the Irish potato, it is
important to know how good a yielder you are planting. You should watch
during harvest and select for propagation for the next year only such
plants as yield best.
We should exercise fully as much care in selecting proper individuals
from which to make a cutting or a layer as we do in selecting a proper
animal to breed from. Just as we select the finest Jersey in the herd
for breeding purposes, so we should choose first the variety of plant we
desire and then the finest individual plant of that variety.
If the variety of the potato that we desire to raise be Early Rose, it
is not enough to select _any_ Early Rose plants, but the very best Early
Rose plants, to furnish our seed.
[Illustration: FIG. 47. LAYERING]
It is not enough to select large, fine potatoes for cuttings. A large
potato may not produce a bountifully yielding plant. _It will produce a
plant like the one that produced it._ It may be that this one large
potato was the only one produced by the original plant. If so, the plant
that grows from it will tend to be similarly unproductive. Thus you see
the importance of _selecting in the field a plant that has exactly the
qualities desired in the new plant_.
One of the main reasons why gardeners raise plants from buds instead of
from seeds is that the seed of many plants will not produce plants like
the parent. This failure to "come true," as it is called, is sometimes
of value, for it occasionally leads to improvement. For example, suppose
that a thousand apple or other fruit or flower seeds from plants usually
propagated by cuttings be planted; it may be that one out of a thousand
or a million will be a very valuable plant. If a valuable plant be so
produced, it should be most carefully guarded, multiplied by cuttings or
grafts, and introduced far and wide. It is in this way that new
varieties of fruits and flowers are produced from time to time.
Sometimes, too, a single bud on a tree will differ from the other buds
and will produce a branch different from the other branches. This is
known as _bud variation_. When there is thus developed a branch which
happens to be of a superior kind, it should be propagated by cuttings
just as you would propagate it if it had originated from a seed.
[Illustration: FIG. 48. CURRANT CUTTING]
Mr. Gideon of Minnesota planted many apple seeds, and from them all
raised one tree that was very fruitful, finely flavored, and able to
withstand the cold Minnesota winter. This tree he multiplied by grafts
and named the Wealthy apple. It is said that in giving this one apple to
the world he benefited mankind to the value of more than one million
dollars. It will be well to watch for any valuable bud or seed variant
and never let a promising one be lost. Plants grown in this way from
seeds are usually spoken of as seedlings.
[Illustration: A LUSCIOUS AND EASILY GROWN BERRY]
PLANTS TO BE PROPAGATED FROM BUDS
The following list gives the names and methods by which our common
garden fruits and flowers are propagated:
_Figs_: use cuttings 8 to 10 inches long or layer.
_Grapes_: use long cuttings, layer, or graft upon old vines.
_Apples_: graft upon seedlings, usually crab seedlings one
year old.
_Pears_: bud upon pear seedlings.
_Cherries_: bud upon cherry stock.
_Plums_: bud upon peach stock.
_Peaches_: bud upon peach or plum seedlings.
_Quinces_: use cuttings or layer.
_Blackberries_: propagate by suckers; cut from parent stem.
_Black raspberries_: layer; remove old stem.
_Red raspberries_: propagate by root-cuttings or suckers.
_Strawberries_: propagate by runners.
_Currants_ and _gooseberries_: use long cuttings (these plants
grow well only in cool climates; if attempted in warm
climates, set in cold exposure).
_Carnations_, _geraniums_, _roses_, _begonias_, etc.: propagate by
cuttings rooted in sand and then transplanted to small pots.
=EXERCISE=
Propagate fruits (grape, fig, strawberry) of various kinds; also
ornamental plants. How long does it take them to root? Geraniums
rooted in the spring will bloom in the fall. Do you know any one
who selects seed potatoes properly? Make a careful selection of
seed at the next harvest-time.
SECTION XVIII. PLANT SEEDING
In propagating by seed, as in reproducing by buds, we select a portion
of the parent plant--for a seed is surely a part of the parent
plant--and place it in the ground. There is, however, one great
difference between a seed and a bud. The bud is really a piece of the
parent plant, but a piece of _one_ plant only, while a seed comes from
the parts of two plants.
You will understand this fully if you read carefully Sections XIV-XVI.
Since the seed is made of two plants, the plant that springs from a seed
is much more likely to differ from its mother plant, that is, from the
plant that produces the seed, than is a plant produced merely by buds.
In some cases plants "come true to seed" very accurately. In others they
vary greatly. For example, when we plant the seed of wheat, turnips,
rye, onions, tomatoes, tobacco, or cotton, we get plants that are in
most respects like the parent plant. On the other hand the seed of a
Crawford peach or a Baldwin apple or a Bartlett pear will not produce
plants like its parent, but will rather resemble its wild forefathers.
These seedlings, thus taking after their ancestors, are always far
inferior to our present cultivated forms. In such cases seeding is not
practicable, and we must resort to bud propagation of one sort or
another.
While in a few plants like those just mentioned the seed does not "come
true," most plants, for example, cotton, tobacco, and others, do "come
true." When we plant King cotton we may expect to raise King cotton.
There will be, however, as every one knows, some or even considerable
variation in the field. Some plants, even in exactly the same soil, will
be better than the average, and some will be poorer. Now we see this
variation in the plants of our field, and we believe that the plant will
be in the main like its parent. What should we learn from this? Surely
that if we wish to produce sturdy, healthy, productive plants we must go
into our fields and _pick out just such plants to secure seed from as we
wish to produce another year_. If we wait until the seed is separated
from the plant that produced it before we select our cotton seed, we
shall be planting seed from poor as well as from good plants, and must
be content with a crop of just such stock as we have planted. By
selecting seed from the most productive plants _in the field_ and by
repeating the selection each year, you can continually improve the breed
of the plant you are raising. In selecting seed for cotton you may
follow the plan suggested below for wheat.
[Illustration: FIGS. 49 AND 50. CHRYSANTHEMUMS AND ASPARAGUS]
The difference that you see between the wild and the cultivated
chrysanthemums and between the samples of asparagus shown in Figs. 49
and 50 was brought about by just such continuous seed-selection from the
kind of plant wanted.
[Illustration: FIG. 51. TWO VARIETIES OF FLAX FROM ONE PARENT STOCK]
By the careful selection of seed from the longest flax plants the
increase in length shown in the accompanying figure was gained. The
selection of seed from those plants bearing the most seed, regardless of
the height of the plant, has produced flax like that to the right in the
illustration. These two kinds of flax are from the same parent stock,
but slight differences have been emphasized by continued seed-selection,
until we now have really two varieties of flax, one a heavy seed-bearer,
the other producing a long fiber.
You can in a similar way improve your cotton or any other seed crop.
Sugar beets have been made by seed-selection to produce about double the
percentage of sugar that they did a few years ago. Preparing and
tilling land costs too much in money and work to allow the land to be
planted with poor seed. When you are trying by seed-selection to
increase the yield of cotton, there are two principles that should be
borne in mind: first, seed should be chosen only from plants that bear
many well-filled bolls of long-staple cotton; second, seed should be
taken from no plant that does not by its healthy condition show
hardihood in resisting disease and drouth.
The plan of choosing seeds from selected plants may be applied to wheat;
but it would of course be too time-consuming to select enough single
wheat plants to furnish all of the seed wheat for the next year. In this
case adopt the following plan: In Fig. 52 let _A_ represent the total
size of your wheat field and let _B_ represent a plat large enough to
furnish seed for the whole field. At harvest-time go into section _A_
and select the best plants you can find. Pick the heads of these and
thresh them by hand. The seed so obtained must be carefully saved for
your next sowing.
[Illustration: FIG. 52.]
In the fall sow these selected seeds in area _B_. This area should
produce the best wheat. At the next harvest cull not from the whole
field but from the finest plants of plat _B_, and again save these as
seed for plat _B_. Use the unculled seed from plat _B_ to sow your crop.
By following this plan continuously you will every year have seed from
several generations of choice plants, and each year you will improve
your seed.
It is of course advisable to move your seed plat _B_ every year or two.
For the new plat select land that has recently been planted in legumes.
Always give this plat unwearying care.
In the selection of plants from which to get seed, you must know what
kind of plants are really the best seed plants. First, _you must not
regard single heads or grains, but must select seed from the most
perfect plant_, looking at the plant as a whole and not at any single
part of it. A first consideration is yield. Select the plants that yield
best and are at the same time resistant to drouth, resistant to rust and
to winter, early to ripen, plump of grain, and nonshattering. What a
fine thing it would be to find even one plant free from rust in the
midst of a rusted field! It would mean a _rust-resistant plant_. Its
offspring also would probably be rust-resistant. If you should ever find
such a plant, be sure to save its seed and plant it in a plat by itself.
The next year again save seed from those plants least rusted. Possibly
you can develop a rust-proof race of wheat! Keep your eyes open.
In England the average yield of wheat is thirty bushels an acre, in the
United States it is less than fifteen bushels! In some states the yield
is even less than nine bushels an acre. Let us select our seed with
care, as the English people do, and then we can increase our yield. By
careful seed-selection a plant-breeder in Minnesota increased the yield
of his wheat by one fourth. Think what it would mean if twenty-five per
cent were added to the world's supply of wheat at comparatively no cost;
that is, at the mere cost of careful seed-selection. This would mean an
addition to the world's income of about $500,000,000 each year. The
United States would get about one fifth of this profit.
It often happens that a single plant in a crop of corn, cotton, or wheat
will be far superior to all others in the field. Such a plant deserves
special care. Do not use it merely as a seed plant, but carefully plant
its seeds apart and tend carefully. The following season select the best
of its offspring as favorites again. Repeat this selection and culture
for several years until you fix the variety. This is the way new
varieties are originated from plants propagated by seed.
In 1862 Mr. Abraham Fultz of Pennsylvania, while passing through a field
of bearded wheat, found three heads of beardless, or bald, wheat. These
he sowed by themselves that year, and as they turned out specially
productive he continued to sow this new variety. Soon he had enough seed
to distribute over the country. It became known as the Fultz wheat and
is to-day one of the best varieties in the United States and in a number
of foreign countries. Think how many bushels of wheat have been added to
the world's annual supply by a few moments of intelligent observation
and action on the part of this one man! He saw his opportunity and used
it. How many similar opportunities do you think are lost? How much does
your state or country lose thereby?
=EXERCISE=
Select one hundred seeds from a good, and one hundred from a poor,
plant of the same variety. Sow them in two plats far enough apart
to avoid cross-pollination, yet try to have soil conditions about
the same. Give each the same care and compare the yield. Try this
with corn, cotton, and wheat. Select seeds from the best plant in
your good plat and from the poorest in your poor plat and repeat
the experiment. This will require but a few feet of ground, and the
good plat will pay for itself in yield, while the poor plat will
more than pay in the lesson that it will teach you.
Write to the Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C., and to
your state experiment station for bulletins concerning
seed-selection and methods of plant-improvement.
SECTION XIX. SELECTING SEED CORN
If a farmer would raise good crops he must, as already stated, select
good seed. Many of the farmer's disappointments in the quantity and
quality of his crops--disappointments often thought to come from other
causes--are the result of planting poor seed. Seeds not fully ripened,
if they grow at all, produce imperfect plants. Good seed, therefore, is
the first thing necessary for a good crop. The seed of perfect plants
only should be saved.
By wise and persistent selection, made in the field before the crop is
fully matured, corn can be improved in size and made to mature earlier.
Gather ears only from the most productive plants and save only the
largest and best kernels.
[Illustration: FIG. 53. THE KIND OF EAR TO SELECT]
You have no doubt seen the common American blackbirds that usually
migrate and feed in such large numbers. They all look alike in every
way. Now, has it ever occurred to you to ask why all blackbirds are
black? The blackbirds are black simply because their parents are black.
Now in the same way that the young blackbirds resemble their parents,
corn will resemble its parent stock. How many ears of corn do you find
on a stalk? One, two, sometimes three or four. You find two ears of corn
on a stalk because it is the nature of that particular stalk to produce
two ears. In the same way the nature of some stalks is to produce but
one ear, while it is the nature of others sometimes to produce two or
more.
This resemblance of offspring to parent is known to scientists as
heredity, or as "like producing like."
Some Southern corn-breeders take advantage of this law to improve their
corn crop. If a stalk can be made to produce two ears of corn just as
large as the single ear that most stalks bear, we shall get twice as
much corn from a field in which the "two-eared" variety is planted. In
the North and West the best varieties of corn have been selected to make
but one ear to the stalk. It is generally believed that this is the best
practice for the shorter growing seasons of the colder states.
[Illustration: FIG. 54. SELECT SEED FROM A STALK LIKE THAT ON LEFT]
These facts ought to be very helpful to us next year when our fathers
are planting corn. We should get them to plant seed secured only from
stalks that produced the most corn, whether the stalk had two or more
ears or only one. If we follow this plan year by year, each acre of land
will be made to produce more kernels and hence a larger crop of corn,
and yet no more work will be required to raise the crop.
In addition to enlarging the yield of corn, you can, by proper selection
of the best and most productive plants in the field, grow a new variety
of seed corn. To do this you need only take the largest and best
kernels from stalks bearing two ears; plant these, and at the next
harvest again save the best kernels from stalks bearing the best ears.
If you keep up this practice with great care for several years, you will
get a vigorous, fruitful variety that will command a high price for
seed.
=EXPERIMENT=
[Illustration: FIG. 55. IMPROVEMENT OF CORN BY SELECTION
Boone County white corn on left, and original type, from which it
was developed by selection, on right]
Every school boy and girl can make this experiment at leisure. From
your own field get two ears of corn, one from a stalk bearing only
one ear and the other from a stalk bearing two well-grown ears.
Plant the grains from one ear in one plat, and the grains from the
other in a plat of equal size. Use for both the same soil and the
same fertilizer. Cultivate both plats in the same way. When the
crop is ready to harvest, husk the corn, count the ears, and weigh
the corn. Then write a short essay on your work and on the results
and get your teacher to correct the story for your home paper.
SECTION XX. WEEDS
Have you ever noticed that some weeds are killed by one particular
method, but that this same method may entirely fail to kill other kinds
of weeds? If we wish to free our fields of weeds with the greatest ease,
we must know the nature of each kind of weed and then attack it in the
way in which we can most readily destroy it.
[Illustration: FIG. 56. PIGWEED]
The ordinary pigweed (Fig. 56) differs from many other weeds in that it
lives for only one year. When winter comes, it must die. Each plant,
however, bears a great number of seeds. If we can prevent the plant from
bearing seed in its first year, there will not be many seeds to come up
the next season. In fact, only those seeds that were too deeply buried
in the soil to come up the previous spring will be left, and of these
two-year-old seeds many will not germinate. During the next season some
old seeds will produce plants, but the number will be very much
diminished. If care be exercised to prevent the pigweed from seeding
again, and the same watchfulness be continued for a few seasons, this
weed will be almost entirely driven from our fields.
A plant like the pigweed, which lives only one year, is called an
_annual_ and is one of the easiest weeds to destroy. Mustard, plantain,
chess, dodder, cockle, crab grass, and Jimson weed are a few of our most
disagreeable annual weeds.
The best time to kill any weed is when it is very small; therefore the
ground in early spring should be constantly stirred in order to kill the
young weeds before they grow to be strong and hardy.
[Illustration: FIG. 57. WILD CARROT]
The wild carrot differs from an annual in this way: it lives throughout
one whole year without producing seeds. During its first year it
accumulates a quantity of nourishment in the root, then rests in the
winter. Throughout the following summer it uses this nourishment rapidly
to produce its flowers and seeds. Then the plant dies. Plants that live
through two seasons in this way are called _biennials_. Weeds of this
kind may be destroyed by _cutting the roots below the leaves_ with a
grubbing-hoe or spud. A spud may be described as a chisel on a long
handle (see Fig. 58). If biennials are not cut low enough they will
branch out anew and make many seeds. Among the most common biennials are
the thistle, moth mullein, wild carrot, wild parsnip, and burdock.
[Illustration: FIG. 58. A SPUD]
[Illustration: FIG. 59. HOUND'S TONGUE]
A third group of weeds consists of those that live for more than two
years. These weeds are usually most difficult to kill. They propagate by
means of running rootstocks as well as by seeds. Plants that live more
than two seasons are known as _perennials_ and include, for example,
many grasses, dock, Canada thistle, poison ivy, passion flower, horse
nettle, etc. There are many methods of destroying perennial weeds. They
may be dug entirely out and removed. Sometimes in small areas they may
be killed by crude sulphuric acid or may be starved by covering them
with boards or a straw stack or in some other convenient way. A method
that is very effective is to smother the weeds by a dense growth of
some other plant, for example, cowpeas or buckwheat. Cowpeas are to be
preferred, since they also enrich the soil by the nitrogen that the
root-tubercles gather.
[Illustration: FIG. 60. CANADA THISTLE]
Weeds do injury in numerous ways; they shade the crop, steal its
nourishment, and waste its moisture. Perhaps their only service is to
make lazy people till their crops.
=EXERCISE=
You should learn to know by name the twenty worst weeds of your
vicinity and to recognize their seeds. If there are any weeds you
are not able to recognize, send a sample of each to your state
experiment station. Make a collection, properly labeled, of weeds
and weed seeds for your school.
SECTION XXI. SEED PURITY AND VITALITY
Seeds produce plants. The difference between a large and a small yield
may depend upon the kind of plants we raise, and the kind of plant in
turn is dependent upon the seeds that we sow.
Two things are important in the selection of seeds--purity and vitality.
Seeds should be _pure_; that is, when sown they should produce no other
plant than the one that we wish to raise. They should be able to grow.
The ability of a seed to grow is termed its _vitality_. Good seed should
be nearly or quite pure and should possess high vitality. The vitality
of seeds is expressed as a per cent; for example, if 97 seeds out of 100
germinate, or sprout, the vitality is said to be 97. The older the seed
the less is its vitality, except in a few rare instances in which seeds
cannot germinate under two or three years.
Cucumber seeds may show 90 per cent vitality when they are one year old,
75 per cent when two years old, and 70 per cent when three years
old--the per cent of vitality diminishing with increase of years. The
average length of life of the seeds of cultivated plants is short: for
example, the tomato lives four years; corn, two years; the onion, two
years; the radish, five years. The cucumber seed may retain life after
ten years; but the seeds of this plant too lose their vitality with an
increase in years.
It is important when buying seeds to test them for purity and vitality.
Dealers who are not honest often sell old seeds, although they know that
seeds decrease in value with age. Sometimes, however, to cloak
dishonesty they mix some new seeds with the old, or bleach old and
yellow seeds in order to make them resemble fresh ones.
It is important, therefore, that all seeds bought of dealers should be
thoroughly examined and tested; for if they do not grow, we not only pay
for that which is useless but we are also in great danger of producing
so few plants in our fields that we shall not get full use of the land,
and thus we may suffer a more serious loss than merely paying for a few
dead seeds. It will therefore be both interesting and profitable to
learn how to test the vitality of seeds.
To test vitality plant one hundred seeds in a pot of earth or in damp
sand, or place them between moist pieces of flannel, and take care to
keep them moist and warm. Count those that germinate and thus determine
the percentage of vitality. Germinating between flannel is much quicker
than planting in earth. Care should be used to keep mice away from
germinating seeds. (See Fig. 61.)
[Illustration: FIG. 61. A SEED-GERMINATOR
Consisting of two soup plates, some sand, and a piece of cloth]
Sometimes the appearance of a package will show whether the seed has
been kept in stock a long time. It is, however, much more difficult to
find out whether the seeds are pure. You can of course easily
distinguish seeds that differ much from those you wish to plant, but
often certain weed seeds are so nearly like certain crop seeds as not to
be easily recognized by the eye. Thus the dodder or "love vine," which
so often ruins the clover crop, has seeds closely resembling clover
seeds. The chess, or cheat, has seeds so nearly like oats that only a
close observer can tell them apart. However, if you watch the seeds that
you buy, and study the appearance of crop seeds, you may become expert
in recognizing those that have no place in your planting.
One case is reported in which a seed-dealer intentionally allowed an
impurity of 30 per cent to remain in the crop seeds, and this impurity
was mainly of weed seeds. There were 450,000 of one kind and 288,000 of
another in each pound of seed. Think of planting weeds at that rate!
Sometimes three fourths of the seeds you buy are weed seeds.
In purchasing seeds the only safe plan is to buy of dealers whose
reputation can be relied upon.
It not seldom happens that seeds, like corn, are stored in open cribs or
barns before the moisture is entirely dried out of the seeds. Such seeds
are liable to be frozen during a severe winter, and of course if this
happens they will not sprout the following spring. The only way to tell
whether such seeds have been killed is to test samples of them for
vitality. Testing is easy; replanting is costly and often results in a
short crop.
[Illustration: FIG. 62. IMPURITIES IN SEEDS
Tube 1 represents one pound of redtop grass as bought; Tube 2, amount of
pure redtop grass seeds in Tube 1; Tube 3, amount of chaff and dirt in
Tube 1; Tube 4, amount of weed seeds in Tube 1; Tube 5, amount of total
waste in Tube 1; Tube 6, amount of pure germinable seeds in Tube 1]
=EXERCISE=
Examine seeds both for vitality and purity. Write for farmers'
bulletins on both these subjects. What would be the loss to a
farmer who planted a ten-acre clover field with seeds that were 80
per cent bad? Can you recognize the seeds of the principal
cultivated plants? Germinate some beet seeds. What per cent comes
up? Can you explain? Collect for your school as many kinds of wild
and cultivated seeds as you can.
CHAPTER IV
HOW TO RAISE A FRUIT TREE
Let each pupil grow an apple tree this year and attempt to make it the
best in his neighborhood. In your attempt suppose you try the following
plan. In the fall take the seed of an apple--a crab-apple is good--and
keep it in a cool place during the winter. The simplest way to do this
is to bury it in damp sand. In the spring plant it in a rich, loose
soil.
Great care must be taken of the young shoot as soon as it appears above
the ground. You want to make it grow as tall and as straight as possible
during this first year of its life, hence you should give it rich soil
and protect it from animals. Before the ground freezes in the fall take
up the young tree with the soil that was around it and keep it all
winter in a cool, damp place.
Now when spring comes it will not do to set out the carefully tended
tree, for an apple tree from seed will not be a tree like its parent,
but will tend to resemble a more distant ancestor. The distant ancestor
that the young apple tree is most likely to take after is the wild
apple, which is small, sour, and otherwise far inferior to the fruit we
wish to grow. It makes little difference, therefore, what kind of apple
seed we plant, since in any event we cannot be sure that the tree grown
from it will bear fruit worth having unless we force it to do so.
[Illustration: FIG. 63. A YOUNG FRUIT-GROWER]
SECTION XXII. GRAFTING
By a process known as _grafting_ you can force your tree to produce
whatever variety of apple you desire. Many people raise fruit trees
directly from seed without grafting. Thus they often produce really
worthless trees. By grafting they would make sure not only of having
good trees rather than poor ones but also of having the particular kind
of fruit that they wish. Hence you must now graft your tree.
First you must decide what variety of apple you want to grow on the
tree. The Magnum Bonum is a great favorite as a fall apple. The Winesap
is a good winter apple, while the Red Astrachan is a profitable early
apple, especially in the lowland of the coast region. The Northern Spy,
AEsop, and Spitzenburg are also admirable kinds. Possibly some other
apple that you know may suit your taste and needs better than any of
these varieties.
If you have decided to raise an AEsop or a Magnum Bonum or a Winesap, you
must now cut a twig from the tree of your choice and graft it upon the
little tree that you have raised. Choose a twig that is about the
thickness of the young tree at the point where you wish to graft. Be
careful to take the shoot from a vigorous, healthy part of the tree.
[Illustration: FIG. 64. TONGUE GRAFTING]
There are many ways in which you may join the chosen shoot or twig upon
the young tree, but perhaps the best one for you to use is known as
_tongue grafting_. This is illustrated in Fig. 64. The upper part, _b_,
which is the shoot or twig that you cut from the tree, is known as the
_scion_; the lower part, _a_, which is the original tree, is called the
_stock_.
Cut the scion and stock as shown in Fig. 64. Join the cut end of the
scion to the cut end of the stock. When you join them, notice that under
the bark of each there is a thin layer of soft, juicy tissue. This is
called the _cambium_. To make a successful graft the cambium in the
scion must exactly join the cambium in the stock. Be careful, then, to
see that cambium meets cambium. You now see why grafting can be more
successfully done if you select a scion and stock of nearly the same
size.
[Illustration: FIG. 65. A COMPLETED GRAFT
Showing scion and stock from which it was made]
After fitting the parts closely together, bind them with cotton yarn
(see Fig. 65) that has been coated with grafting wax. This wax is made
of equal parts of tallow, beeswax, and linseed oil. Smear the wax
thoroughly over the whole joint, and make sure that the joint is
completely air-tight.
[Illustration: FIG. 66.
To make a root graft, cut along the slanting line]
The best time to make this graft is when scion and stock are dormant,
that is, when they are not in leaf. During the winter, say in February,
is the best time to graft the tree. Set the grafted tree away again in
damp sand until spring, then plant it in loose, rich soil.
Since all parts growing above the graft will be of the same kind as the
scion, while all branches below it will be like the stock, it is well to
graft low on the stock or even upon the root itself. The slanting double
line in Fig. 66 shows the proper place to cut off for such grafting.
[Illustration: FIG. 67. A COMPLETED ROOT GRAFT]
If you like you may sometime make the interesting and valuable
experiment of grafting scions from various kinds of apple trees on the
branches of one stock. In this way you can secure a tree bearing a
number of kinds of fruit. You may thus raise the Bonum, Red Astrachan,
Winesap, and as many other varieties of apples as you wish, upon one
tree. For this experiment, however, you will find it better to resort to
_cleft grafting_, which is illustrated in Fig. 68.
[Illustration: FIG. 68. CLEFT GRAFTING]
Luther Burbank, the originator of the Burbank potato, in attempting to
find a variety of apple suited to the climate of California, grafted
more than five hundred kinds of apple scions on one tree, so that he
might watch them side by side and find out which kind was best suited to
that state.
SECTION XXIII. BUDDING
If, instead of an apple tree, you were raising a plum or a peach tree, a
form of propagation known as _budding_ would be better than grafting.
Occasionally budding is also employed for apples, pears, cherries,
oranges, and lemons. Budding is done in the following manner. A single
bud is cut from the scion and is then inserted under the bark of a
one-year-old peach seedling, so that the cambium of the bud and stock
may grow together.
[Illustration: FIG. 69. HOW TO CUT A BUD FROM A SCION]
[Illustration: FIG. 70. THE STEPS IN BUDDING]
Cut scions of the kind of fruit tree you desire from a one-year-old twig
of the same variety. Wrap them in a clean, moist cloth until you are
ready to use them. Just before using cut the bud from the scion, as
shown in Fig. 69. This bud is now ready to be inserted on the north side
of the stock, just two or three inches above the ground. The north side
is selected to avoid the sun. Now, as shown at _a_ in Fig. 70, make a
cross and an up-and-down incision, or cut, on the stock; pull the bark
back carefully, as shown in _B_; insert the bud _C_, as shown in _D_;
then fold the bark back and wrap with yarn or raffia, as shown in _E_.
As soon as the bud and branches have united, remove the wrapping to
prevent its cutting the bark and cut the tree back close to the bud, as
in Fig. 71, so as to force nourishment into the inserted bud.
[Illustration: FIG. 71.
Sloping line shows where to cut tree]
Budding is done in the field without disturbing the tree as it stands in
the ground. The best time to do budding is during the summer or fall
months, when the bark is loose enough to allow the buds to be easily
inserted.
Trees may be budded or grafted on one another only when they are nearly
related. Thus the apple, crab-apple, hawthorn, and quince are all
related closely enough to graft or bud on one another; the pear grows on
some hawthorns, but not well on an apple; some chestnuts will unite with
some kinds of oaks.
[Illustration: FIG. 72.
Lines show where to trim]
By using any of these methods you can succeed in getting with certainty
the kind of tree that you desire.
[Illustration: BOTH BUSY STORING APPLES]
SECTION XXIV. PLANTING AND PRUNING
The apple tree that you grafted should be set out in the spring. Dig a
hole three or four feet in diameter where you wish the tree to grow.
Place the tree in the hole and be very careful to preserve all the fine
roots. Spread the roots out fully, water them, and pack fine, rich soil
firmly about them. Place stakes about the young tree to protect it from
injury. If the spot selected is in a windy location, incline the tree
slightly toward the prevailing wind.
[Illustration: FIG. 73.
Present shape comes from pruning]
[Illustration: FIG. 74.
Correct shape]
You must prune the tree as it grows. The object of pruning is to give
the tree proper shape and to promote fruit-bearing. If the bud at the
end of the main shoot grows, you will have a tall, cone-shaped tree. If,
however, the end of the young tree be cut or "headed back" to the lines
shown in Fig. 72, the buds below this point will be forced to grow and
make a tree like that shown in Fig. 73. The proper height of heading for
different fruits varies. For the apple tree a height of two or three
feet is best.
Cutting an end bud of a shoot or branch always sends the nourishment and
growth into the side buds. Trimming or pinching off the side buds throws
the growth into the end bud. You can therefore cause your tree to take
almost any shape you desire. The difference between the trees shown in
Figs. 73 and 74 is entirely the result of pruning. Fig. 74 illustrates
in general a correctly shaped tree. It is evenly balanced, admits light
freely, and yet has enough foliage to prevent sun-scald. Figs. 75 and 76
show the effect of wisely thinning the branches.
[Illustration: FIG. 75.
Unthinned]
[Illustration: FIG. 76.
Properly thinned]
The best time to prune is either in the winter or before the buds start
in the spring. Winter pruning tends to favor wood-production, while
summer pruning lessens wood-production and induces fruitage.
Each particular kind of fruit requires special pruning; for example, the
peach should be made to assume the shape illustrated in Fig. 77. This is
done by successive trimmings, following the plan illustrated in Figs.
71, 78, 79. You will gain several advantages from these trimmings.
First, nourishment will be forced into the peach bud that you set on
your stock. This will secure a vigorous growth of the scion. By a second
trimming take off the "heel" (Fig. 78, _h_) close to the tree, and thus
prevent decay at this point. One year after budding you should reduce
the tree to a "whip," as in Fig. 79, by trimming at the dotted line in
Fig. 78. This establishes the "head" of the tree, which in the case of
the peach should be very low,--about sixteen inches from the ground,--in
order that a low foliage may lessen the danger of sun-scald to the main
trunk.
[Illustration: FIG. 77. THE CUSTOMARY WAY OF PRUNING A PEACH]
[Illustration: FIG. 78. TWO-YEAR-OLD TREE
Cut off heel, _h_]
In pruning never leave a stump such as is shown in Fig. 78, _h_. Such a
stump, having no source of nourishment, will heal very slowly and with
great danger of decay. If this heel is cleanly cut on the line _ch_
(Fig. 78), the wound will heal rapidly and with little danger of decay.
Leaving such a stump endangers the soundness of the whole tree. Fig. 80
shows the results of good and poor pruning on a large tree. When large
limbs are removed it is best to paint the cut surface. The paint will
ward off fungous disease and thus keep the tree from rotting where it
was cut.
Pruning that leaves large limbs branching, as in Fig. 74, _a_, is not to
be recommended, since the limbs when loaded with fruit or when beaten by
heavy winds are liable to break. Decay is apt to set in at the point of
breakage. The entrance of decay-fungi through some such wound or through
a tiny crevice at such a crotch is the beginning of the end of many a
fruitful tree.
[Illustration: FIG. 79. THREE-YEAR-OLD TREE CUT BACK]
Sometimes a tree will go too much to wood and too little to fruit. This
often happens in rich soil and may be remedied by another kind of
pruning known as _root-pruning_. This consists in cutting off a few of
the roots in order to limit the food supply of the plant. You ought to
learn more about root-pruning, however, before you attempt it.
[Illustration: FIG. 80.
Refuses to Heal--Heals promptly]
How is a peach tree made? First, the blossom appears. Then pollination
and fertilization occur. The fruit ripens. The pit, or seed, is saved.
In the spring of the next year the seed is planted. The young tree,
known as the stock, comes up quickly. In August of that year a bud of
the variety which is wanted is inserted in the little stock, near the
ground. One year later, in the spring, the stock is cut off just above
the bud. The bud throws out a shoot, which grows to a height of about
six feet, and in the fall this little peach tree is sold as a
one-year-old tree. However, as is seen, the root is two years old.
[Illustration: FIG. 81. READY TO BEAR]
How is an apple tree made? The seeds are saved in the fall of one year
and planted the following year. The seedlings of the apple do not grow
so rapidly as those of the peach. At the end of the year they are taken
up and sorted, and in the following spring they are planted. In July or
August they are budded. In the spring of the next year the stock is cut
off above the bud, and the bud-shoot grows three or four feet. One year
later the shoot branches and the top begins to form; and in the fall of
the following year the tree may be sold as a two-year-old, although most
persons prefer to buy it a year later as a three-year-old. In some parts
of the country, particularly in the West, the little seedling is grafted
in the second winter, in a grafting room, and the young grafts are set
in the nursery row in the spring to complete their growth.
The planting in the orchard of the young peach and the young apple tree
is done in practically the same way. After the hole for the tree has
been dug and after proper soil has been provided, the roots should be
spread and the soil carefully packed around them.
=EXERCISE=
Do you know any trees in your neighborhood that bear both wild and
budded or grafted fruit? What are the chief varieties of apples
grown in your neighborhood? grapes? currants? plums? cherries?
figs? What is a good apple tree worth? Is there any land near by
that could support a tree and is not now doing so? Examine several
orchards and see whether the trees have the proper shape. Do you
see any evidence of poor pruning? Do you find any heels? Can you
see any place where heels have resulted in rotten or hollow trees?
How could you have prevented this? Has the removal of branches ever
resulted in serious decay? How is this to be prevented?
If your home is not well stocked with all the principal kinds of
fruit, do you not want to propagate and attend to some of each
kind? You will be surprised to find how quickly trees will bear and
how soon you will be eating fruit from your own planting. Growing
your own trees will make you feel proud of your skill.
CHAPTER V
HORTICULTURE
SECTION XXV. MARKET-GARDENING
The word _horticulture_ is one of those broad words under which much is
grouped. It includes the cultivation of orchard fruits, such as apples
and plums; of small fruits, such as strawberries and raspberries; of
garden vegetables for the table; of flowers of all sorts, including
shrubbery and ornamental trees and their arrangement into beautiful
landscape effects around our homes. Horticulture then is a name for an
art that is both far-reaching and important.
The word _gardening_ is generally given to that part of horticulture
which has for its chief aim the raising of vegetables for our tables.
Flower-gardening, or the cultivation of plants valued for their bloom in
making ornamental beds and borders and furnishing flowers for the
decoration of the home, is generally called _floriculture_.
Landscape-gardening is the art of so arranging flower-beds, grass,
shrubbery, and trees as to produce pleasing effects in the grounds
surrounding our homes and in great public parks and pleasure grounds.
Landscape-gardening, like architecture, has developed intoll as the
artist makes them on canvas, but uses natural objects in his pictures
instead of paint and canvas.
=Market-Gardening.= Formerly market-gardening was done on small tracts
of land in the immediate vicinity of large cities, where supplies of
stable manure could be used from the city stables. But with the great
increase in the population of the cities, these small areas could no
longer supply the demand, and the introduction of commercial fertilizers
and the building of railroads enabled gardeners at great distances from
city markets to grow and ship their products. Hence the markets, even in
winter, are now supplied with fresh vegetables from regions where there
is no frost. Then, as spring opens, fruits and vegetables are shipped
from more temperate regions. Later vegetables and fruits come from the
sections nearer the great cities. This gradual nearing of the supply
fields continues until the gardens near the cities can furnish what is
needed.
[Illustration: FIG. 82. STRAWBERRY-GROWING IS AN ART]
The market-gardeners around the great Northern cities, finding that
winter products were coming from the South and from warmer regions,
began to build hothouses and by means of steam and hot-water pipes to
make warm climates in these glass houses. Many acres of land in the
colder sections of the country are covered with heated glass houses, and
in them during the winter are produced fine crops of tomatoes, lettuce,
radishes, cauliflowers, eggplants, and other vegetables. The degree of
perfection which these attain in spite of having such artificial
culture, and their freshness as compared to the products brought from a
great distance, have made winter gardening under glass a very profitable
business. But it is a business that calls for the highest skill and the
closest attention.
[Illustration: FIG. 83. SETTING PLANTS IN A COLD-FRAME]
No garden, even for home use, is complete without some glass sashes, and
the garden will be all the more successful if there is a small heated
greenhouse for starting plants that are afterwards to be set in the
garden.
=Hotbeds.= If there is no greenhouse, a hotbed is an important help in
the garden. The bed is made by digging a pit two feet deep, seven feet
wide, and as long as necessary.
The material for the hotbed is fresh horse manure mixed with leaves.
This is thrown into a heap to heat. As soon as steam is seen coming from
the heap the manure is turned over and piled again so that the outer
part is thrown inside. When the whole is uniformly heated and has been
turned two or three times, it is packed firmly into the pit already dug.
A frame six feet wide, twelve inches high on the north side and eight
inches on the south side and as long as the bed is to be, is now made of
plank. This is set upon the heated manure, thus leaving six inches on
each side outside the frame. More manure is then banked all around it,
and three or four inches of fine light and rich soil are placed inside
the frame.
[Illustration: FIG. 84. THE GLADIOLUS]
The frame is then covered with hotbed sashes six feet long and three
feet wide. These slide up and down on strips of wood let into the sides
of the frame. A thermometer is stuck into the soil and closely watched,
for there will be too much heat at first for sowing seed. When the heat
in the early morning is about 85 deg., seeds may be sowed. The hotbed is
used for starting tomato plants, eggplants, cabbage plants, and other
vegetables that cannot stand exposure. It should be made about eight or
ten weeks before the tender plants can be set out in the locality. In
the South and Southwest it should be started earlier than in the North.
For growing the best tomato plants, and for such hardy plants as lettuce
and cabbage, it will be better to have cold-frames in addition to the
hotbed; these need not be more than two or three sashes.
=Cold-Frames.= A cold-frame is like the frame used for a hotbed, but it
is placed on well-manured soil in a sheltered spot. It is covered with
the same kind of sashes and is used for hardening the plants sowed in
the hotbed. The frame must be well banked with earth on the outside, and
the glass must be covered on cold nights with straw, mats, or old
carpets to keep out frost.
[Illustration: FIG. 85. FRAME TO CARRY THE SASH OF A HOTBED OR COLD-FRAME]
=Care of Hotbed and Cold-Frame.= If the sun be allowed to shine brightly
on the glass of a cold-frame or hotbed, it will soon raise the
temperature in the hotbed to a point that will destroy the plants. It is
necessary, then, to pay close attention to the bed and, when the sun
shines, to slip the sashes down or raise them and place a block under
the upper end to allow the steam to pass off. The cold-frame also must
be aired when the sun shines, and the sashes must be gradually slipped
down in mild weather. Finally, they may be removed entirely on sunshiny
days, so as to accustom the plants to the open air, but they must be
replaced at night. For a while before setting the plants in the open
gardens, leave the sashes off night and day.
[Illustration: FIG. 86. GREENHOUSE AND COLD-FRAMES]
While the hotbed may be used for starting plants, it is much better and
more convenient to have a little greenhouse with fire heat for this
purpose. A little house with but four sashes on each side will be enough
to start a great many plants, and will also give room for some flowers
in pots. With such a house a student can learn to manage a more
extensive structure if he gives close attention to airing, watering, and
keeping out insects.
=Sowing.= The time for sowing the different kinds of seeds is an
important matter. Seeds vary greatly in their requirements. All need
three conditions--a proper degree of heat, moisture, and air. Some
seeds, like English peas, parsnips, beets, and radishes, will germinate
and grow when the soil is still cool in the early spring, and peas will
stand quite a frost after they are up. Therefore we plant English peas
as early as the ground can be worked.
But if we should plant seeds like corn, string (or snap) beans,
squashes, and other tender plants before the ground is warm enough, they
would decay.
Seeds cannot germinate in soil that is perfectly dry, for there must be
moisture to swell them and to start growth. The oxygen of the air is
also necessary, and if seeds are buried so deeply that the air cannot
reach them, they will not grow, even if they are warm and moist.
[Illustration: FIG. 87. GATHERING AND SHIPPING CELERY]
The depth of planting must vary with the character and size of the seed.
English peas may be covered six inches deep and will be all the better
for such covering, but if corn be covered so deep, it hardly gets above
the ground. In planting small seeds like those of the radish, cabbage,
turnip, lettuce, etc., a good rule is to cover them three times the
thickness of the seed.
In sowing seeds when the ground is rather dry, it is a good plan, after
covering them, to tramp on the row so as to press the soil closely to
the seeds and to help it to retain moisture for germination, but do not
pack the soil if it is damp.
In spring never dig or plow the garden while it is still wet, but always
wait until the soil is dry enough to crumble freely.
=What Crops to grow.= The crops to be raised will of course depend upon
each gardener's climate, surroundings, and markets. Sometimes it may pay
a grower, if his soil and climate are particularly suited to one crop,
to expend most of his time and energy on this crop; for example, in some
sections of New York, on potatoes; in parts of Michigan, on celery; in
Georgia, on watermelons; in western North Carolina, on cabbage. If
circumstances allow this sort of gardening, it has many advantages, for
of course it is much easier to acquire skill in growing one crop than in
growing many.
[Illustration: FIG. 88. A LARGE YIELD OF CABBAGES]
On the other hand, it often happens that a gardener's situation requires
him to grow most of the crops known to gardening. Each gardener then
must be guided in his selection of crops by his surroundings.
=Care of Crops.= The gardener who wishes to attain the greatest success
in his art must do four things:
First, he must make his land rich and keep it rich. Much of his success
depends on getting his crops on the market ahead of other growers. To do
this, his crops must grow rapidly, and crops grow rapidly only in rich
soil. Then, too, land conveniently situated for market-gardening is
nearly always costly. Hence the successful market-gardener must plan to
secure the largest possible yield from as small an area as is
practicable. The largest yield can of course be secured from the richest
land.
Second, the gardener must cultivate his rich land most carefully and
economically. He crowds his land with products that must grow apace.
Therefore he, least of all growers, can afford to have any of his soil
go to feed weeds, to have his land wash, or to have his growing crops
suffer for lack of timely and wise cultivation. To cultivate his land
economically the gardener must use the best tools and machines and the
best methods of soil management.
Third, to get the best results he must grow perfect vegetables. To do
this, he must add to good tillage a knowledge of the common plant
diseases and of the ways of insects and bacterial pests; he must know
how and when to spray, how and when to treat his seed, how and when to
poison, how and when to trap his insect foes and to destroy their
hiding-places.
Fourth, not only must the gardener grow perfect vegetables, but he must
put them on the market in perfect condition and in attractive shape. Who
cares to buy wilted, bruised, spoiling vegetables? Gathering, bundling,
crating, and shipping are all to be watched carefully. Baskets should be
neat and attractive, crates clean and snug, barrels well packed and well
headed. Careful attention to all these details brings a rich return.
Among the gardener's important crops are the following:
=Asparagus.= This is a hardy plant. Its seed may be sowed either early
in the spring or late in the fall. The seeds should be planted in rows.
If the plants are well cultivated during the spring and summer, they
will make vigorous roots for transplanting in the autumn.
In the fall prepare a piece of land by breaking it unusually deep and by
manuring it heavily. After the land is thoroughly prepared, make in it
furrows for the asparagus roots. These furrows should be six inches deep
and three feet apart. Then remove the roots from the rows in which they
have been growing during the summer, and set them two feet apart in the
prepared furrows. Cover carefully at once.
[Illustration: FIG. 89. A CRATE OF ASPARAGUS]
In the following spring the young shoots must be well cultivated. In
order to economize space, beets or lettuce may be grown between the
asparagus rows during this first season. With the coming of cold weather
the asparagus must again be freely manured and all dead tops cut off.
Some plants will be ready for market the second spring. If the bed is
kept free from weeds and well manured, it will increase in
productiveness from year to year.
=Beans.= The most generally planted beans are those known as string, or
snap, beans. Of the many varieties, all are sensitive to cold and hence
must not be planted until frost is over.
Another widely grown kind of bean is the lima, or butter, bean. There
are two varieties of the lima bean. One is large and generally grows on
poles. This kind does best in the Northern states. The other is a small
bean and may be grown without poles. This kind is best suited to the
warmer climates of the Southern states.
=Cabbage.= In comparatively warm climates the first crop of cabbage is
generally grown in the following way. The seeds are sowed in beds in
September, and the plants grown from this sowing are in November
transplanted to ground laid off in sharp ridges. The young plants are
set on the south side of the ridges in order that they may be somewhat
protected from the cold of winter. As spring comes on, the ridge is
partly cut down at each working until the field is leveled, and
thereafter the cultivation should be level.
[Illustration: FIG. 90. CABBAGE READY FOR SHIPMENT]
Early cabbages need heavy applications of manure. In the spring, nitrate
of soda applied in the rows is very helpful.
Seeds for the crop following this early crop should be sowed in March.
Of course these seeds should be of a later variety than the first used.
The young plants should be transplanted as soon as they are large
enough. Early cabbages are set in rows three feet apart, the plants
eighteen inches apart in the row. As the later varieties grow larger
than the earlier ones, the plants should be set two feet apart in the
row.
In growing late fall and winter cabbage the time of sowing varies with
the climate. For the Northern and middle states, seeding should be done
during the last of March and in April. South of a line passing west from
Virginia it is hard to carry cabbages through the heat of summer and get
them to head in the fall. However, if the seeds are sowed about the
first of August in rich and moist soil and the plants set in the same
sort of soil in September, large heads can be secured for the December
market.
[Illustration: FIG. 91. CELERY TRIMMED, WASHED, AND BUNCHED]
=Celery.= In the extreme northern part of our country, celery seeds are
often sowed in a greenhouse or hotbed. This is done in order to secure
plants early enough for summer blanching. This plan, however, suits only
very cool climates.
In the middle states the seeds are usually sowed in a well-prepared bed
about April. The young plants are moved to other beds as soon as they
need room. Generally they are transplanted in July to rows prepared for
them. These should be four feet apart, and the plants should be set six
inches apart in the row. The celery bed should be carefully cultivated
during the summer. In the fall, hill the stalks up enough to keep them
erect. After the growing season is over dig them and set them in
trenches. The trenches should be as deep as the celery is tall, and
after the celery is put in them they should be covered with boards and
straw.
In the more southern states, celery is usually grown in beds. The beds
are generally made six feet wide, and rows a foot apart are run
crosswise. The plants are set six inches apart, in September, and the
whole bed is earthed up as the season advances. Finally, when winter
comes the beds are covered with leaves or straw to prevent the plants
from freezing. The celery is dug and bunched for market at any time
during the winter.
By means of cold-frames a profitable crop of spring celery may be
raised. Have the plants ready to go into the cold-frames late in October
or early in November. The soil in the frame should be made very deep.
The plants should make only a moderately rapid growth during the winter.
In the early spring they will grow rapidly and so crowd one another as
to blanch well. As celery grown in this way comes on the market at a
time when no other celery can be had, it commands a good price.
In climates as warm as that of Florida, beds of celery can be raised in
this way without the protection of cold-frames. A slight freeze does not
hurt celery, but a long-continued freezing spell will destroy it.
Some kinds of celery seem to turn white naturally. These are called
self-blanching kinds. Other kinds need to be banked with earth in order
to make the stalks whiten. This kind usually gives the best and crispest
stalks.
=Cucumbers and Cantaloupes.= Although cucumbers and cantaloupes are very
different plants, they are grown in precisely the same way. Some
gardeners plant them in hills. However, this is perhaps not the best
plan. It is better to lay the land off in furrows six feet apart. After
filling these with well-rotted stable manure, throw soil over them. Then
make the top flat and plant the seeds. After the plants are up thin them
out, leaving them a foot or more apart in the rows. Cultivate regularly
and carefully until the vines cover the entire ground.
It is a good plan to sow cowpeas at the last working of cantaloupes, in
order to furnish some shade for the melons. As both cucumbers and
cantaloupes are easily hurt by cold, they should not be planted until
the soil is warm and all danger of frost is past.
Cucumbers are always cut while they are green. They should never be
pulled from the vine, but should always be cut with a piece of the stem
attached. Cantaloupes should be gathered before they turn yellow and
should be ripened in the house.
[Illustration: FIG. 92. STRIPED CUCUMBER BEETLE AND LARVA
All magnified]
In some sections of the country the little striped cucumber-beetle
attacks the melons and cucumbers as soon as they come up. These beetles
are very active, and if their attacks are not prevented they will
destroy the tender plants. Bone dust and tobacco dust applied just as
the plants appear above the ground will prevent these attacks. This
treatment not only keeps off the beetle, but also helps the growth of
the plants.
=Eggplants.= Eggplants are so tender that they cannot be transplanted
like tomatoes to cold-frames and gradually hardened to stand the cold
spring air. These plants, started in a warm place, must be kept there
until the soil to which they are to be transplanted is well warmed by
the advance of spring. After the warm weather has fully set in,
transplant them to rich soil, setting them three feet apart each way.
This plant needs much manure. If large, perfect fruit is expected, the
ground can hardly be made too rich.
Eggplants are subject to the same bacterial blight that is so
destructive to tomatoes. The only way to prevent this disease is to
plant in ground not lately used for tomatoes or potatoes.
[Illustration: FIG. 93. AN ONION HARVEST]
=Onions.= The method of growing onions varies with the use to which it
is intended to put them. To make the early sorts, which are eaten green
in the spring, little onions called _sets_ are planted. These are grown
from seeds sowed late in the spring. The seeds are sowed thickly in rows
in rather poor land. The object of selecting poor land is that the
growth of the sets may be slow. When the sets have reached the size of
small marbles, they are ready for the fall planting.
In the South the sets may be planted in September. Plant them in rows in
rich and well-fertilized soil. They will be ready for market in March
or April. In the more northerly states the sets are to be planted as
early as possible in the spring.
To grow ripe onions the seeds must be sowed as early in the spring as
the ground can be worked. The plants are thinned to a stand of three
inches in the rows. As they grow, the soil is drawn away from them so
that the onions sit on top of the soil with only their roots in the
earth.
[Illustration: FIG. 94. HOTBED FOR STARTING TOMATO PLANTS]
As soon as the tops ripen pull the onions and let them lie in the sun
until the tops are dry. Then put them under shelter. As onions keep best
with their tops attached, do not remove these until it is time for
marketing.
=Peas.= The English pea is about the first vegetable of the season to be
planted. It may be planted as soon as the ground is in workable
condition. Peas are planted in rows, and it is a good plan to stretch
wire netting for them to climb on. However, where peas are extensively
cultivated they are allowed to fall on the ground.
There are many sorts of peas, differing both in quality and in time of
production. The first to be planted are the extra-early varieties. These
are not so fine as the later, wrinkled sorts, but the seeds are less apt
to rot in cold ground. Following these, some of the fine, wrinkled sorts
are to be planted in regular succession. Peas do not need much manure
and do best in a light, warm soil.
=Tomatoes.= There is no vegetable grown that is more widely used than
the tomato. Whether fresh or canned it is a staple article of food that
can be served in many ways.
By careful selection and breeding, the fruit of the tomato has in recent
years been much improved. There are now many varieties that produce
perfectly smooth and solid fruit, and the grower can hardly go amiss in
his selection of seeds if he bears his climate and his particular needs
in mind.
Early tomatoes are started in the greenhouse or in the hotbed about ten
weeks before the time for setting the plants in the open ground. They
are transplanted to cold-frames as soon as they are large enough to
handle. This is done to harden the plants and to give them room to grow
strong before the final transplanting.
In kitchen gardens tomatoes are planted in rows four feet apart with the
plants two feet apart in the rows. They are generally trained to stakes
with but one stalk to a stake. When there is plenty of space, however,
the plants are allowed to grow at will and to tumble on the ground. In
this way they bear large crops. During the winter the markets are
supplied with tomatoes either from tropical sections or from hothouses.
As those grown in the hothouses are superior in flavor to those shipped
from Florida and from the West Indies, and as they command good prices,
great quantities are grown in this way.
In the South the bacterial blight which attacks the plants of this
family is a serious drawback to tomato culture. The only way to escape
this disease is to avoid planting tomatoes on land in which eggplants,
tomatoes, or potatoes have been blighted. Lime spread around the plants
seems to prevent the blight for one season on some soils.
At the approach of frost in the fall, green tomatoes can easily be
preserved by wrapping them in paper. Gather them carefully and wrap each
separately. Pack them in boxes and store in a cellar that is close
enough to prevent the freezing of the fruit. A few days before the
tomatoes are wanted for the table unpack as many as are needed, remove
the paper, and allow them to ripen in a warm room.
Tomatoes require a rich soil. Scattering a small quantity of nitrate of
soda around their roots promotes rapid growth.
=Watermelons.= As watermelons need more room than can usually be spared
in a garden, they are commonly grown as a field crop.
A very light, sandy soil suits watermelons best. They can be grown on
very poor soil if a good supply of compost be placed in each hill. The
land for the melons should be laid off in about ten-foot checks; that
is, the furrows should cross one another at right angles about every ten
feet. A wide hole should be dug where the furrows cross, and into this
composted manure should be put.
The best manure for watermelons is a compost of stable manure and
wood-mold from the forest. Pile the manure and wood-mold in alternate
layers for some time before the planting season. During the winter cut
through the pile several times until the two are thoroughly mixed and
finely pulverized. Be sure to keep the compost heap under shelter.
Compost will lose in value if it is exposed to rains.
At planting-time, put two or three shovelfuls of this compost into each
of the prepared holes, and over the top of the manure scatter a handful
of any high-grade complete fertilizer. Then cover fertilizer and manure
with soil, and plant the seeds in this soil. In cultivating, plow both
ways of the checked rows and throw the earth toward the plants.
Some growers pinch off the vines when they have grown about three feet
long. This is done to make them branch more freely, but the pinching is
not necessary.
A serious disease, the watermelon wilt, is rapidly spreading through
melon-growing sections. This disease is caused by germs in the soil, and
the germs are hard to kill. If the wilt should appear in your
neighborhood, do not allow any stable manure to be used on your melon
land, for the germs are easily scattered by means of stable manure. The
germs also cling to the seeds of diseased melons, and these seeds bear
the disease to other fields. If you treat melon seeds as you are
directed on page 135 to treat oat seeds, the germs on the seeds will be
destroyed. By crossing the watermelon on the citron melon, a watermelon
that is resistant to wilt has recently been developed and successfully
grown in soils in which wilt is present. The new melon, inferior in
flavor at first, is being improved from season to season and bids fair
to rival other melons in flavor.
[Illustration: FIG. 95. DEWBERRIES]
SECTION XXVI. FLOWER GARDENING
The comforts and joys of life depend largely upon small things. Of these
small things perhaps none holds a position of greater importance in
country life than the adornment of the home, indoors and outdoors, with
flowers tastefully arranged. Their selection and planting furnish
pleasant recreation; their care is a pleasing employment; and each
little plant, as it sprouts and grows and develops, may become as much a
pet as creatures of the sister animal kingdom. A beautiful, well-kept
yard adds greatly to the pleasure and attractiveness of a country home.
If a beautiful yard and home give joy to the mere passer-by, how much
more must their beauty appeal to the owners. The decorating of the home
shows ambition, pride, and energy--important elements in a successful
life.
[Illustration: FIG. 96. AN EASY WAY TO BEAUTIFY THE HOME]
Plant trees and shrubs in your yard and border your masses of shrubbery
with flower-beds. Do not disfigure a lawn by placing a bed of flowers in
it. Use the flowers rather to decorate the shrubbery, and for borders
along walks, and in the corners near steps, or against foundations.
If you wish to raise flowers for the sake of flowers, not as
decorations, make the flower-beds in the back yard or at the side of the
house.
[Illustration: FIG. 97. A BACK YARD TO REFINE THE CHILDREN OF THE
FAMILY]
Plants may be grown from seeds or from bulbs or from cuttings. The
rooting of cuttings is an interesting task to all who are fond of
flowers. Those who have no greenhouse and who wish to root cuttings of
geraniums, roses, and other plants may do so in the following way. Take
a shallow pan, an old-fashioned milk pan for instance, fill it nearly
full of clean sand, and then wet the sand thoroughly. Stick the cuttings
thickly into this wet sand, set the pan in a warm, sunny window, and
keep the sand in the same water-soaked condition. Most cuttings will
root well in a few weeks and may then be set into small flower-pots.
Cuttings of tea roses should have two or three joints and be taken from
a stem that has just made a flower. Allow one of the rose leaves to
remain at the top of the cutting. Stick this cutting into the sand and
it will root in about four weeks. Cuttings of Cape jasmine may be rooted
in the same way. Some geraniums, the rose geranium for example, may be
grown from cuttings of the roots.
[Illustration: FIG. 98. REPOTTING]
Bulbs are simply the lower ends of the leaves of a plant wrapped tightly
around one another and inclosing the bud that makes the future
flower-stalk. The hyacinth, the narcissus, and the common garden onion
are examples of bulbous plants. The flat part at the bottom of the bulb
is the stem of the plant reduced to a flat disk, and between each two
adjacent leaves on this flat stem there is a bud, just as above-ground
there is a bud at the base of a leaf. These buds on the stem of the bulb
rarely grow, however, unless forced to do so artificially. The number
of bulbs may be greatly increased by making these buds grow and form
other bulbs. In increasing hyacinths the matured bulbs are dug in the
spring, and the under part of the flat stem is carefully scraped away to
expose the base of the buds. The bulbs are then put in heaps and covered
with sand. In a few weeks each bud has formed a little bulb. The
gardener plants the whole together to grow one season, after which the
little bulbs are separated and grown into full-sized bulbs for sale.
Other bulbs, like the narcissus or the daffodil, form new bulbs that
separate without being scraped.
[Illustration: FIG. 99. A CLEMATIS]
There are some other plants which have underground parts that are
commonly called bulbs but which are not bulbs at all; for example, the
gladiolus and the caladium, or elephant's ear. Their underground parts
are bulblike in shape, but are really solid flattened stems with eyes
like the underground stem of the Irish potato. These parts are called
_corms_. They may be cut into pieces like the potato and each part will
grow.
The dahlia makes a mass of roots that look greatly like sweet potatoes,
but there are no eyes on them as there are on the sweet potato. The only
eyes are on the base of the stem to which they are joined. They may be
sprouted like sweet potatoes and then soft cuttings made of the green
shoots, after which they may be rooted in the greenhouse and later
planted in pots.
There are many perennial plants that will bloom the first season when
grown from the seed, though such seedlings are seldom so good as the
plants from which they came. They are generally used to originate new
varieties. Seeds of the dahlia, for instance, can be sowed in a box in a
warm room in early March, potted as soon as the plants are large enough
to handle, and finally planted in the garden when the weather is warm.
They will bloom nearly as soon as plants grown by dividing the roots or
from cuttings.
[Illustration: FIG. 100. OUTDOOR-GROWN CHRYSANTHEMUMS]
In growing annual plants from seed, there is little difficulty if the
grower has a greenhouse or a hotbed with a glass sash. Even without
these the plants may be grown in shallow boxes in a warm room. The best
boxes are about four inches deep with bottoms made of slats nailed a
quarter of an inch apart to give proper drainage. Some moss is laid over
the bottom to prevent the soil from sifting through. The boxes should
then be filled with light, rich soil. Fine black forest mold, thoroughly
mixed with one fourth its bulk of well-rotted manure, makes the best
soil for filling the seed-boxes. If this soil be placed in an oven and
heated very hot, the heat will destroy many weeds that would otherwise
give trouble. After the soil is put in the boxes it should be well
packed by pressing it with a flat wooden block. Sow the seeds in
straight rows, and at the ends of the rows put little wooden labels with
the names of the flowers on them.
[Illustration: FIG. 101. THE CARNATION (ELDORADO)]
Seeds sowed in the same box should be of the same general size in order
that they may be properly covered, for seeds need to be covered
according to their size. After sowing the seed, sift the fine soil over
the surface of the box. The best soil for covering small seeds is made
by rubbing dry moss and leaf-mold through a sieve together. This makes a
light cover that will not bake and will retain moisture. After covering
the seeds, press the soil firm and smooth with a wooden block. Now
sprinkle the covering soil lightly with a watering-pot until it is
fairly moistened. Lay some panes of glass over the box to retain the
moisture, and avoid further watering until moisture becomes absolutely
necessary. Too much watering makes the soil too compact and rots the
seed.
As soon as the seedlings have made a second pair of leaves, take them up
with the point of a knife and transplant them into other boxes filled in
the same way. They should be set two inches apart so as to give them
room to grow strong. They may be transplanted from the boxes to the
flower-garden by taking an old knife-blade and cutting the earth into
squares, and then lifting the entire square with the plant and setting
it where it is wanted.
There are many flower-seeds which are so small that they must not be
covered at all. In this class we find begonias, petunias, and Chinese
primroses. To sow these prepare boxes as for the other seeds, and press
the earth smooth. Then scatter some fine, dry moss thinly over the
surface of the soil. Sprinkle this with water until it is well
moistened, and at once scatter the seeds thinly over the surface and
cover the boxes with panes of glass until the seeds germinate.
Transplant as soon as the young plants can be lifted out separately on
the blade of a penknife.
[Illustration: FIG. 102. THE POET'S NARCISSUS]
Many kinds of flower-seeds may be sowed directly in the open ground
where they are to remain. The sweet pea is one of the most popular
flowers grown in this way. The seeds should be sowed rather thickly in
rows and covered fully four inches deep. The sowing should be varied in
time according to the climate. From North Carolina southward, sweet peas
may be sowed in the fall or in January, as they are very hardy and
should be forced to bloom before the weather becomes hot. Late spring
sowing will not give fine flowers in the South. From North Carolina
northward the seeds should be sowed just as early in the spring as the
ground can be easily worked. When the plants appear, stakes should be
set along the rows and a strip of woven-wire fence stretched for the
plants to climb on. Morning-glory seeds are also sowed where they are to
grow. The seeds of the moonflower are large and hard and will fail to
grow unless they are slightly cut. To start their growth make a slight
cut just through the hard outer coat of the seed so as to expose the
white inside. In this way they will grow very readily. The seeds of the
canna, or Indian-shot plant, are treated in a similar way to start them
growing.
[Illustration: FIG. 103. A CYCLAMEN]
[Illustration: FIG. 104. A MODERN SWEET PEA]
The canna makes large fleshy roots which in the North are taken up,
covered with damp moss, and stored under the benches of the greenhouse
or in a cellar. If allowed to get too dry, they will wither. From
central North Carolina south it is best to cover them up thickly with
dead leaves and let them stay in the ground where they grew. In the
early spring take them up and divide for replanting.
[Illustration: FIG. 105. DAHLIAS]
Perennial plants, such as our flowering shrubs, are grown from cuttings
of the ripe wood after the leaves have fallen in autumn. From North
Carolina southward these cuttings should be set in rows in the fall.
Cuttings ten inches long are set so that the tops are just even with the
ground. A light cover of pine leaves will prevent damage from frost.
Farther north the cuttings should be tied in bundles and well buried in
the ground with earth heaped over them. In the spring set them in rows
for rooting. In the South all the hardy hybrid perpetual roses can be
grown in this way, and in any section the cuttings of most of the
spring-flowering shrubs will grow in the same manner. The Japanese
quince, which makes such a show of its scarlet flowers in early spring,
can be best grown from three-inch cuttings made of the roots and planted
in rows in the fall.
[Illustration: FIG. 106. FOUR-O'CLOCKS SET IN A GOOD PLACE]
Many of our ornamental evergreen trees, such as the arbor vitae, can be
grown in the spring from seeds sowed in a frame. Cotton cloth should be
stretched over the trees while they are young, to prevent the sun from
scorching them. When a year old they may be set in nursery rows to
develop until they are large enough to plant. Arbor vitae may also be
grown from cuttings made by setting young tips in boxes of sand in the
fall and keeping them warm and moist through the winter. Most of them
will be rooted by spring.
The kinds of flowers that you can grow are almost countless. You can
hardly make a mistake in selecting, as all are interesting. Start this
year with a few and gradually increase the number under your care year
by year, and aim always to make your plants the choicest of their kind.
Of annuals there are over four hundred kinds cultivated. You may select
from the following list: phlox, petunias, China asters, California
poppies, sweet peas, pinks, double and single sunflowers, hibiscus,
candytuft, balsams, morning-glories, stocks, nasturtiums, verbenas,
mignonette.
[Illustration: FIG. 107. A WINDOW BOX]
Of perennials select bleeding-hearts, pinks, bluebells, hollyhocks,
perennial phlox, perennial hibiscus, wild asters, and goldenrods. From
bulbs choose crocus, tulip, daffodil, narcissus, lily of the valley, and
lily.
Some climbers are cobaea, honeysuckle, Virginia creeper, English ivy,
Boston ivy, cypress vine, hyacinth bean, climbing nasturtiums, and
roses.
To make your plants do best, cultivate them carefully. Allow no weeds to
grow among them and do not let the surface of the soil dry into a hard
crust. Beware, however, of stirring the soil too deep. Loosening the
soil about the roots interrupts the feeding of the plant and does harm.
Climbing plants may be trained to advantage on low woven-wire fences.
These are especially serviceable for sweet peas and climbing
nasturtiums. Do not let the plants go to seed, since seeding is a heavy
drain on nourishment. Moreover, the plant has served its end when it
seeds and is ready then to stop blossoming. You should therefore pick
off the old flowers to prevent their developing seeds. This will cause
many plants which would otherwise soon stop blossoming to continue
bearing flowers for a longer period.
[Illustration: FIG. 108. A WINDOW-GARDEN]
=Window-Gardening.= Growing plants indoors in the window possesses many
of the attractions of outdoor flower-gardening, and is a means of
beautifying the room at very small expense. Especially do window-gardens
give delight during the barren winter time. They are a source of culture
and pleasure to thousands who cannot afford extended and expensive
ornamentation.
The window-garden may vary in size from an eggshell holding a minute
plant to boxes filling all the available space about the window. The
soil may be in pots for individual plants or groups of plants or in
boxes for collections of plants. You may raise your flowers inside of
the window on shelves or stands, or you may have a set of shelves built
outside of the window and inclosed in glazed sashes. The illustration on
page 119 gives an idea of such an external window-garden.
[Illustration: FIG. 109. AN INSIDE WINDOW BOX IN ITS FULL GLORY]
The soil must be rich and loose. The best contains some undecayed
organic matter such as leaf-mold or partly decayed sods and some sand.
Raise your plants from bulbs, cuttings, or seed, just as in outdoor
gardens. Some plants do better in cool rooms, others in a warmer
temperature.
[Illustration: FIG. 110. MAKING THE OUTSIDE OF A WINDOW BLOOM]
If the temperature ranges from 35 deg. to 70 deg., averaging about 55 deg., azaleas,
daisies, carnations, candytuft, alyssum, dusty miller, chrysanthemums,
cinerarias, camellias, daphnes, geraniums, petunias, violets, primroses,
and verbenas make especially good growths.
[Illustration: A BEAUTIFUL WINDOW FLOWER]
If the temperature is from 50 deg. to 90 deg., averaging 70 deg., try abutilon,
begonia, bouvardia, caladium, canna, Cape jasmine, coleus, fuchsia,
gloxinia, heliotrope, lantana, lobelia, roses, and smilax.
If your box or window is shaded a good part of the time, raise begonias,
camellias, ferns, and Asparagus Sprengeri.
[Illustration: FIG. 111. FERNS FOR BOTH INDOORS AND OUTDOORS]
When the soil is dry, water it; then apply no more water until it again
becomes dry. Beware of too much water. The plants should be washed
occasionally with soapsuds and then rinsed. If red spiders are present,
sponge them off with water as hot as can be borne comfortably by the
hand. Newspapers afford a good means of keeping off the cold.
CHAPTER VI
THE DISEASES OF PLANTS
SECTION XXVII. THE CAUSE AND NATURE OF PLANT DISEASE
Plants have diseases just as animals do; not the same diseases, to be
sure, but just as serious for the plant. Some of them are so dangerous
that they kill the plant; others partly or wholly destroy its usefulness
or its beauty. Some diseases are found oftenest on very young plants,
others prey on the middle-aged tree, while still others attack merely
the fruit. Whenever a farmer or fruit-grower has disease on his plants,
he is sure to lose much profit.
You have all seen rotten fruit. This is diseased fruit. Fruit rot is a
plant disease. It costs farmers millions of dollars annually. A
fruit-grower recently lost sixty carloads of peaches in a single year
through rot which could have been largely prevented if he had known how.
Many of the yellowish or discolored spots on leaves are the result of
disease, as is also the smut of wheat, corn, and oats, the blight of the
pear, and the wilt of cotton. Many of these diseases are contagious, or,
as we often hear said of measles, "catching." This is true, among
others, of the apple and peach rots. A healthy apple can catch this
disease from a sick apple. You often see evidence of this in the apple
bin. So, too, many of the diseases found in the field or garden are
contagious.
Sometimes when the skin of a rotten apple has been broken you will find
in the broken place a blue mold. It was this that caused the apple to
decay. This mold is a living plant; very small, certainly, but
nevertheless a plant. Let us learn a little about molds, in order that
we may better understand our apple and potato rots, as well as other
plant diseases.
If you cut a lemon and let it stand for a day or two, there will
probably appear a blue mold like that you have seen on the surface of
canned fruit. Bread also sometimes has this blue mold; at other times
bread has a black mold, and yet again a pink or a yellow mold.
These and all other molds are tiny living plants. Instead of seeds they
produce many very small bodies that serve the purpose of seeds and
reproduce the mold. These are called _spores_. Fig. 112 shows how they
are borne on the parent plant.
[Illustration: FIG. 112. TANGLED THREADS OF BLUE MOLD
The single stalk on the left shows how spores are borne]
It is also of great importance to decide whether by keeping the spores
away we may prevent mold. Possibly this experiment will help us. Moisten
a piece of bread, then dip a match or a pin into the blue mold on a
lemon, and draw the match across the moist bread. You will thus plant
the spores in a row, though they are so small that perhaps you may not
see any of them. Place the bread in a damp place for a few days and
watch it. Does the mold grow where you planted it? Does it grow
elsewhere? This experiment should prove to you that molds are living
things and can be planted. If you find spots elsewhere, you must bear in
mind that these spores are very small and light and that some of them
were probably blown about when you made your sowing. When you touch the
moldy portion of a dry lemon, you see a cloud of dust rise. This dust is
made of millions of spores.
[Illustration: FIG. 113. MAGNIFIED ROSE MILDEW]
If you plant many other kinds of mold you will find that the molds come
true to the kind that is planted; that like produces like even among
molds.
[Illustration: FIG. 114. A MILDEWED ROSE]
You can prove, also, that the mold is caused only by other mold. To do
this, put some wet bread in a wide-mouthed bottle and plug the mouth of
the bottle with cotton. Kill all the spores that may be in this bottle
by steaming it an hour in a cooking-steamer. This bread will not mold
until you allow live mold from the outside to enter. If, however, at any
time you open the bottle and allow spores to enter, or if you plant
spores therein, and if there be moisture enough, mold will immediately
set in.
[Illustration: FIG. 115. A HIGHLY MAGNIFIED SECTION OF DISEASED PEAR LEAF
Showing how spores are borne]
The little plants which make up these molds are called _fungi_. Some
fungi, such as the toadstools, puffballs, and devil's snuff-box, are
quite large; others, namely the molds, are very small; and others are
even smaller than the molds. Fungi never have the green color of
ordinary plants, always reproduce by spores, and feed on living matter
or matter that was once alive. Puffballs, for example, are found on
rotting wood or dead twigs or roots. Some fungi grow on living plants,
and these produce plant disease by taking their nourishment from the
plant on which they grow; the latter plant is called the _host_.
The same blue mold that grows on bread often attacks apples that have
been slightly bruised; it cannot pierce healthy apple skin. You can
plant the mold in the bruised apple just as you did on bread and watch
its rapid spread through the apple. You learn from this the need of
preventing bruised or decayed apples from coming in contact with healthy
fruit.
[Illustration: FIG. 116. SPORES OF THE PEAR SCAB
The spores are borne on stalks]
Just as the fungus studied above lives in the apple or bread, so other
varieties live on leaves, bark, etc. Fig. 113 represents the surface of
a mildewed rose leaf greatly magnified. This mildew is a fungus. You can
see its creeping stems, its upright stalk, and numerous spores ready to
fall off and spread the disease with the first breath of wind. You must
remember that this figure is greatly magnified, and that the whole
portion shown in the figure is only about one tenth of an inch across.
Fig. 114 shows the general appearance of a twig affected by this
disease.
Mildew on the rose or on any other plant may be killed by spraying the
leaves with a solution of liver of sulphur; to make this solution, use
one ounce of the liver of sulphur to two gallons of water.
The fungus that causes the pear-leaf spots has its spores in little pits
(Fig. 115). The spores of some fungi also grow on stalks, as shown in
Fig. 116. This figure represents an enlarged view of the pear scab,
which causes so much destruction.
You see, then, that fungi are living plants that grow at the expense of
other plants and cause disease. Now if you can cover the leaf with a
poison that will kill the spore when it comes, you can prevent the
disease. One such poison is the Bordeaux (_bor-do_') mixture, which
has proved of great value to farmers.
Since the fungus in most cases lives within the leaves, the poison on
the outside does no good after the fungus is established. The treatment
can be used only to _prevent_ attack, not to cure, except in the case of
a few mildews that live on the outside of the leaf, as does the rose
mildew.
=EXERCISE=
Why do things mold more readily in damp places? Do you now
understand why fruit is heated before it is canned? Try to grow
several kinds of mold. Do you know any fungi which may be eaten?
Transfer disease from a rotten apple to a healthy one and note the
rapidity of decay. How many really healthy leaves can you find on a
strawberry plant? Do you find any spots with reddish borders and
white centers? Do you know that this is a serious disease of the
strawberry? What damage does fruit mold do to peaches, plums, or
strawberries?
Write to your experiment station for bulletins on plant diseases
and methods for making and using spraying mixtures.
SECTION XXVIII. YEAST AND BACTERIA
Can you imagine a plant so small that it would take one hundred plants
lying side by side to equal the thickness of a sheet of writing-paper?
There are plants that are so small. Moreover, these same plants are of
the utmost importance to man. Some of them do him great injury, while
others aid him very much.
You will see their importance when you are told that certain of them in
their habits of life cause great change in the substances in which they
live. For example, when living in a sugary substance they change the
sugar into a gas and an alcohol. Do you remember the bright bubbles of
gas you have seen rising in sweet cider or in wine as it soured? These
bubbles are caused by one of these small plants--the yeast plant. As the
yeast plant grows in the sweet fruit juice, alcohol is made and a gas is
given off at the same time, and this gas makes the bubbles.
[Illustration: FIG. 117. YEAST PLANTS
_A_, a single plant; _B_, group of two budding cells; _C_, group of
several cells]
Later, other kinds of plants equally small will grow and change the
alcohol into an acid which you will recognize as vinegar by its sour
taste and peculiar odor. Thus vinegar is made by the action of two
different kinds of little living plants in the cider. That these are
living beings you can prove by heating the cider and keeping it tightly
sealed so that nothing can enter it. You will find that because the
living germs have been killed by the heat, the cider will not ferment or
sour as it did before. The germs could of course be killed by poisons,
but then the cider would be unfit for use. It is this same little yeast
plant that causes bread to rise.
When you see any decaying matter you may know that in it minute plants
much like the yeast plant are at work. Since decay is due to them, we
take advantage of the fact that they cannot grow in strong brine or
smoke; and we prepare meat for keeping by salting it or by smoking it or
by both of these methods.
You see that some of the yeast plants and _bacteria_, as many of these
forms are called, are very friendly to us, while others do us great
harm.
Some bacteria grow within the bodies of men and other animals or in
plants. When they do so they may produce disease. Typhoid fever,
diphtheria, consumption, and many other serious diseases are caused by
bacteria. Fig. 118, _e_, shows the bacterium that causes typhoid fever.
In the picture, of course, it is very greatly magnified. In reality
these bacteria are so small that about twenty-five thousand of them side
by side would extend only one inch. These small beings produce their
great effects by very rapid multiplication and by giving off powerful
poisons.
[Illustration: FIG. 118. FORMS OF BACTERIA
_a_, grippe; _b_, bubonic plague; _c_, diphtheria; _d_, tuberculosis;
_e_, typhoid fever]
Bacteria are so small that they are readily borne on the dust particles
of the air and are often taken into the body through the breath and also
through water or milk. You can therefore see how careful you should be
to prevent germs from getting into the air or into water or milk when
there is disease about your home. You should heed carefully all
instructions of your physician on this point, so that you may not spread
disease.
SECTION XXIX. PREVENTION OF PLANT DISEASE
In the last two sections you have learned something of the nature of
those fungi and bacteria that cause disease in animals and plants. Now
let us see how we can use this knowledge to lessen the diseases of our
crops. Farmers lose through plant diseases much that could be saved by
proper precaution.
First, you must remember that every diseased fruit, twig, or leaf bears
millions of spores. These must be destroyed by burning. They must not be
allowed to lie about and spread the disease in the spring. See that
decayed fruit in the bin or on the trees is destroyed in the same
manner. Never throw decayed fruit into the garden or orchard, as it may
cause disease the following year.
Second, you can often kill spores on seeds before they are planted and
thus prevent the development of the fungus (see pp. 134-137).
Third, often the foliage of the plant can be sprayed with a poison that
will prevent the germination of the spores (see pp. 138-140).
Fourth, some varieties of plants resist disease much more stoutly than
others. We may often select the resistant form to great advantage (see
Fig. 119).
Fifth, after big limbs are pruned off, decay often sets in at the wound.
This decay may be prevented by coating the cut surface with paint, tar,
or some other substance that will not allow spores to enter the wound or
to germinate there.
Sixth, it frequently happens that the spore or fungus remains in the
soil. This is true in the cotton wilt, and the remedy is so to rotate
crops that the diseased land is not used again for this crop until the
spores or fungi have died.
SECTION XXX. SOME SPECIAL PLANT DISEASES
=Fire-Blight of the Pear and Apple.= You have perhaps heard your father
speak of the "fire-blight" of pear and apple trees. This is one of the
most injurious and most widely known of fruit diseases. Do you want to
know the cause of this disease and how to prevent it?
First, how will you recognize this disease? If the diseased bough at
which you are looking has true fire-blight, you will see a blackened
twig with withered, blackened leaves. During winter the leaves do not
fall from blighted twigs as they do from healthy ones. The leaves wither
because of the diseased twig, not because they are themselves diseased.
Only rarely does the blight really enter the leaf. Sometimes a sharp
line separates the blighted from the healthy part of the twig.
This disease is caused by bacteria, of which you have read in another
section. The fire-blight bacteria grow in the juicy part of the stem,
between the wood and the bark. This tender, fresh layer (as explained on
page 79) is called the _cambium_, and is the part that breaks away and
allows you to slip the bark off when you make your bark whistle in the
spring. The growth of new wood takes place in the cambium, and this part
of the twig is therefore full of nourishment. If this nourishment is
stolen the plant of course soon suffers.
The bacteria causing fire-blight are readily carried from flower to
flower and from twig to twig by insects; therefore to keep these and
other bacteria away from your trees you must see to it that all the
trees in the neighborhood of your orchard are kept free from mischievous
enemies. If harmful bacteria exist in near-by trees, insects will carry
them to your orchard. You must therefore watch all the relatives of the
pear; namely, the apple, hawthorn, crab, quince, and mountain ash, for
any of these trees may harbor the germs.
[Illustration: FIG. 119. A RESISTANT VARIETY OF SEA ISLAND COTTON
All the other plants in this field died. This one row lived because it
could resist the cotton wilt]
When any tree shows blight, every diseased twig on it must be cut off
and burned in order to kill the germs, and you must cut low enough on
the twig to get all the bacteria. It is best to cut a foot below the
blackened portion. If by chance your knife should cut into wood
containing the living germs, and then you should cut into healthy wood
with the same knife, you yourself would spread the disease. It is
therefore best after each cutting to dip your knife into a solution of
carbolic acid. This will kill all bacteria clinging to the knife-blade.
The surest time to do complete trimming is after the leaves fall in the
autumn, as diseased twigs are most easily recognized at that time, but
the orchard should be carefully watched in the spring also. If a large
limb shows the blight, it is perhaps best to cut the tree entirely down.
There is little hope for such a tree.
A large pear-grower once said that no man with a sharp knife need fear
the fire-blight. Yet our country loses greatly by this disease each
year.
[Illustration: FIG. 120. FIRE-BLIGHT BACTERIA
Magnified]
It may be added that winter pruning tends to make the tree form much new
wood and thus favors the disease. Rich soil and fertilizers make it much
easier in a similar way for the tree to become a prey to blight.
=EXERCISE=
Ask your teacher to show you a case of fire-blight on a pear or
apple tree. Can you distinguish between healthy and diseased wood?
Cut the twig open lengthwise and see how deep into the wood and how
far down the stem the disease extends. Can you tell surely from the
outside how far the twig is diseased? Can you find any twig that
does not show a distinct line of separation between diseased and
healthy wood? If so, the bacteria are still living in the cambium.
Cut out a small bit of the diseased portion and insert it under the
bark of a healthy, juicy twig within a few inches of its tip and
watch it from day to day. Does the tree catch the disease? This
experiment may prove to you how easily the disease spreads. If you
should see any drops like dew hanging from diseased twigs, touch a
little of this moisture to a healthy flower and watch for results.
Cut and burn all diseased twigs that you can find. Estimate the
damage done by fire-blight.
Farmers' bulletins on orchard enemies are published by the
Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C., and can be had by
writing for them. They will help your father much in treating
fire-blight.
=Oat Smuts.= Let us go out into a near-by oat field and look for all the
blackened heads of grain that we can find. How many are there? To count
accurately let us select an area one foot square. We must look
carefully, for many of these blackened heads are so low that we shall
not see them at the first glance. You will be surprised to find as many
as thirty or forty heads in every hundred so blackened. These blackened
heads are due to a plant disease called _smut_.
[Illustration: FIG. 121. LOOSE SMUT OF OATS
The glumes at _a_ more nearly destroyed than the glumes at _b_]
When threshing-time comes you will notice a great quantity of black dust
coming from the grain as it passes through the machine. The air is full
of it. This black dust consists of the spores of a tiny fungous plant.
The fungous smut plant grows upon the oat plant, ripens its spores in
the head, and is ready to be thoroughly scattered among the grains of
the oats as they come from the threshing-machine.
These spores cling to the grain and at the next planting are ready to
attack the sprouting plantlet. A curious thing about the smut is that it
can gain a foothold only on very young oat plants; that is, on plants
about an inch long or of the age shown in Fig. 121.
When grain covered with smut spores is planted, the spores develop with
the sprouting seeds and are ready to attack the young plant as it breaks
through the seed-coat. You see, then, how important it is to have seed
grain free from smut. A substance has been found that will, without
injuring the seeds, kill all the smut spores clinging to the grain. This
substance is called _formalin_. Enough seed to plant a whole acre can be
treated with formalin at a cost of only a few cents. Such treatment
insures a full crop and clean seed for future planting. Try it if you
have any smut.
[Illustration: FIG. 122. A CROP FROM OATS TREATED WITH FORMALIN]
Fig. 122 illustrates what may be gained by using seeds treated to
prevent smut. The annual loss to the farmers of the United States from
smut on oats amounts to several millions of dollars. All that is needed
to prevent this loss is a little care in the treatment of seed and a
proper rotation of crops.
=EXERCISE=
Count the smutted heads on a patch three feet square and estimate
the percentage of smut in all the wheat and oat fields near your
home. On which is it most abundant? Do you know of any fields that
have been treated for smut? If so, look for smut in these fields.
Ask how they were treated. Do you know of any one who uses
bluestone for wheat smut? Can oats be treated with bluestone?
At planting time get an ounce of formalin at your drug store or
from the state experiment station. Mix this with three gallons of
water. This amount will treat three bushels of seeds. Spread the
seeds thinly on the barn floor and sprinkle them with the mixture,
being careful that all the seeds are thoroughly moistened. Cover
closely with blankets for a few hours and plant very soon after
treatment. Try this and estimate the per cent of smut at next
harvest-time. Write to your experiment station for a bulletin on
smut treatment.
[Illustration: FIG. 123. A SCABBY SEED POTATO]
[Illustration: FIG. 124. A HEALTHY SEED POTATO]
=Potato Scab.= The scab of the white, or Irish, potato is one of the
commonest and at the same time most easily prevented of plant diseases.
Yet this disease diminishes the profits of the potato-grower very
materially. Fig. 123 shows a very scabby potato, while Fig. 124
represents a healthy one. This scab is caused by a fungous growth on the
surface of the potato. Of course it lessens the selling-price of the
potatoes. If seed potatoes be treated to a bath of formalin just before
they are planted, the formalin will kill the fungi on the potatoes and
greatly diminish the amount of scab at the next harvest. Therefore
before they are planted, seed potatoes should be soaked in a weak
solution of formalin for about two hours. One-half pint of formalin to
fifteen gallons of water makes a proper solution.
[Illustration: FIG. 125
From a scabby potato, like the one in Fig. 123, this yield was obtained]
[Illustration: FIG. 126
From a healthy potato, like the one in Fig. 124, this yield was obtained]
[Illustration: FIG. 127. EFFECT OF SPRAYING
Sprayed potatoes on left; unsprayed on right]
One pint of formalin, or enough for thirty gallons of water, will cost
but thirty-five cents. Since this solution can be used repeatedly, it
will do for many bushels of seed potatoes.
=Late Potato Blight.= The blight is another serious disease of the
potato. This is quite a different disease from the scab and so requires
different treatment. The blight is caused by another fungus, which
attacks the foliage of the potato plant. When the blight seriously
attacks a crop, it generally destroys the crop completely. In the year
1845 a potato famine extending over all the United States and Europe was
caused by this disease.
[Illustration: FIG. 128. YIELD FROM TWO FIELDS OF THE SAME SIZE
The one at the top was sprayed; the one at the bottom was unsprayed]
Spraying is the remedy for potato blight. Fig. 128 shows the effect of
spraying upon the yield. In this case the sprayed field yielded three
hundred and twenty-four bushels an acre, while the unsprayed yielded
only one hundred bushels to an acre. Fig. 127 shows the result of three
applications of the spraying mixture on the diseased field. Figs. 129
and 130 show how the spraying is done.
[Illustration: FIG. 129. SPRAYING MACHINE]
[Illustration: FIG. 130. SPRAYING MACHINE]
=EXERCISE=
Watch the potatoes at the next harvest and estimate the number that
is damaged by scab. You will remember that formalin is the
substance used to prevent grain smuts. Write to your state
experiment station for a bulletin telling how to use formalin, as
well as for information regarding other potato diseases. Give the
treatment a fair trial in a portion of your field this year and
watch carefully for results. Make an estimate of the cost of
treatment and of the profits. How does the scab injure the value of
the potato? The late blight can often be recognized by its odor.
Did you ever smell it as you passed an affected field?
[Illustration: FIG. 131. CLUB ROOT]
=Club Root.= Club root is a disease of the cabbage, turnip, cauliflower,
etc. Its general effect is shown in the illustration (Fig. 131).
Sometimes this disease does great damage. It can be prevented by using
from eighty to ninety bushels of lime to an acre.
=Black Knot.= Black knot is a serious disease of the plum and of the
cherry tree. It attacks the branches of the tree; it is well
illustrated in Fig. 132. Since it is a contagious disease, great care
should be exercised to destroy all diseased branches of either wild or
cultivated plums or cherries. In many states its destruction is enforced
by law. All black knot should be cut out and burned some time before
February of each year. This will cost little and save much.
[Illustration: FIG. 132. BLACK KNOT]
=Peach Leaf Curl.= Peach leaf curl does damage amounting to about
$3,000,000 yearly in the United States. It can be almost entirely
prevented by spraying the tree with Bordeaux mixture or lime-sulphur
wash before the buds open in the spring. It is not safe to use strong
Bordeaux mixture on peach trees when they are in leaf.
[Illustration: FIG. 133. MOLDY PEACHES]
=Cotton Wilt.= Cotton wilt when it once establishes itself in the soil
completely destroys the crop. The fungus remains in the soil, and no
amount of spraying will kill it. The only known remedy is to cultivate a
resistant variety of cotton or to rotate the crop.
[Illustration: FIG. 134. PEACH MUMMIES]
=Fruit Mold.= Fruit mold, or brown rot, often attacks the unripe fruit
on the tree, and turns it soft and brown and finally fuzzy with a coat
of mildew. Fig. 133 shows some peaches thus attacked. Often the fruits
do not fall from the trees but shrivel up and become "mummies" (Fig.
134). This rot is one of the most serious diseases of plums and peaches.
It probably diminishes the value of the peach harvest from 50 to 75 per
cent. Spraying according to the directions in the Appendix will kill the
disease.
[Illustration: FIG. 135. HALF OF TREE SPRAYED TO PREVENT PEACH CURL
Note the difference in foliage and fruit on the sprayed and unsprayed
halves of the tree, and the difference in yield shown below]
CHAPTER VII
ORCHARD, GARDEN, AND FIELD INSECTS
SECTION XXXI. INSECTS IN GENERAL
The farmer who has fought "bugs" on crop after crop needs no argument to
convince him that insects are serious enemies to agriculture. Yet even
he may be surprised to learn that the damage done by them, as estimated
by good authority, amounts to millions and millions of dollars yearly in
the United States and Canada.
[Illustration: FIG. 136. ANTS]
Every one thinks he knows what an insect is. If, however, we are willing
in this matter to make our notion agree with that of the people who have
studied insects most and know them best, we must include among the true
insects only such air-breathing animals as have six legs, no more, and
have the body divided into three parts--head, thorax, and abdomen. These
parts are clearly shown in Fig. 136, which represents the ant, a true
insect. All insects do not show the divisions of the body so clearly as
this figure shows them, but on careful examination you can usually make
them out. The head bears one pair of feelers, and these in many insects
serve also as organs of smell and sometimes of hearing. Less prominent
feelers are to be found in the region of the mouth. These serve as
organs of taste.
[Illustration: FIG. 137. PARTS OF AN INSECT]
[Illustration: FIG. 138. COMPOUND EYE OF DRAGON FLY]
The eyes of insects are especially noticeable. Close examination shows
them to be made up of a thousand or more simple eyes. Such an eye is
called a _compound eye_. An enlarged view of one of these is shown in
Fig. 138.
Attached to the thorax are the legs and also the wings, if the insect
has wings. The rear portion is the abdomen, and this, like the other
parts, is composed of parts known as segments. The insect breathes
through openings in the abdomen and thorax called _spiracles_ (see Fig.
137).
An examination of spiders, mites, and ticks shows eight legs; therefore
these do not belong to the true insects, nor do the thousand-legged
worms and their relatives.
[Illustration: FIG. 139. THE HOUSE FLY
_a_, egg; _b_, larva, or maggot; _c_, pupa; _d_, adult male. (All
enlarged)]
The chief classes of insects are as follows: the flies, with two wings
only; the bees, wasps, and ants, with four delicate wings; the beetles,
with four wings--two hard, horny ones covering the two more delicate
ones. When the beetle is at rest its two hard wings meet in a straight
line down the back. This peculiarity distinguishes it from the true bug,
which has four wings. The two outer wings are partly horny, and in
folding lap over each other. Butterflies and moths are much alike in
appearance but differ in habit. The butterfly works by day and the moth
by night. Note the knob on the end of the butterfly's feeler (Fig. 143).
The moth has no such knob.
It is important to know how insects take their food, for by knowing this
we are often able to destroy insect pests. Some are provided with mouth
parts for chewing their food; others have a long tube with which they
pierce plants or animals and, like the mosquito, suck their food from
the inside. Insects of this latter class cannot of course be harmed by
poison on the surface of the leaves on which they feed.
[Illustration: FIG. 140. A TYPICAL BUG
_a_, adult; _b_, side view of sucking mouth-part Both _a_ and _b_ are
much enlarged]
[Illustration: Fig. 141. BEETLE
_a_, larva; _b_, pupa; _c_, adult; _d_, burrow]
Many insects change their form from youth to old age so much that you
can scarcely recognize them as the same creatures. First comes the egg.
The egg hatches into a worm-like animal known as a grub, maggot, or
caterpillar, or, as scientists call it, a _larva_. This creature feeds
and grows until finally it settles down and spins a home of silk, called
a _cocoon_ (Fig. 145). If we open the cocoon we shall find that the
animal is now covered with a hard outside skeleton, that it cannot move
freely, and that it cannot eat at all. The animal in this state is known
as the _pupa_ (Figs. 145 and 146). Sometimes, however, the pupa is not
covered by a cocoon, sometimes it is soft, and sometimes it has some
power of motion (Fig. 141). After a rest in the pupa stage the animal
comes out a mature insect (Figs. 142 and 143).
From this you can see that it is especially important to know all you
can about the life of injurious insects, since it is often easier to
kill these pests at one stage of their life than at another. Often it is
better to aim at destroying the seemingly harmless beetle or butterfly
than to try to destroy the larvae that hatch from its eggs, although, as
you must remember, it is generally the larvae that do the most harm.
Larvae grow very rapidly; therefore the food supply must be great to meet
the needs of the insect.
[Illustration: FIG. 142. MOTH AND COCOON]
Some insects, the grasshopper for example, do not completely change
their form. Fig. 147 represents some young grasshoppers, which very
closely resemble their parents.
[Illustration: FIG. 143. BUTTERFLY]
[Illustration: FIG. 144. STRUCTURE OF THE CATERPILLAR]
[Illustration: FIG. 145. MOTH PUPA IN COCOON]
Insects lay many eggs and reproduce with remarkable rapidity. Their
number therefore makes them a foe to be much dreaded. The queen honeybee
often lays as many as 4000 eggs in twenty-four hours. A single house fly
lays between 100 and 150 eggs in one day. The mosquito lays eggs in
quantities of from 200 to 400. The white ant often lays 80,000 in a day,
and so continues for two years, probably laying no less than 40,000,000
eggs. In one summer the bluebottle fly could have 500,000,000
descendants if they all lived. The plant louse, at the end of the fifth
brood, has laid in a single year enough eggs to produce 300,000,000
young. Of course every one knows that, owing to enemies and diseases
(for the insects have enemies which prey on them just as they prey on
plants) comparatively few of the insects hatched from these eggs live
till they are grown.
[Illustration: FIG. 146. A BUTTERFLY PUPA
Note outline of the butterfly]
The number of insects which are hurtful to crops, gardens, flowers, and
forests seems to be increasing each season. Therefore farm boys and
girls should learn to recognize these harmful insects and to know how
they live and how they may be destroyed. Those who know the forms and
habits of these enemies of plants and trees are far better prepared to
fight them than are those who strike in the dark. Moreover such
knowledge is always a source of interest and pleasure. If you begin to
study insects, you will soon find your love for the study growing.
[Illustration: FIG. 147. THE GROWTH OF A GRASSHOPPER]
=EXERCISE=
Collect cocoons and pupae of insects and hatch them in a
breeding-cage similar to the one illustrated in Fig. 149. Make
several cages of this kind. Collect larvae of several kinds; supply
them with food from plants upon which you found them. Find out the
time it takes them to change into another stage. Write a
description of this process.
The plant louse could produce in its twelfth brood
10,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 offspring. Each louse is about one
tenth of an inch long. If all should live and be arranged in single
file, how many miles long would such a procession be?
[Illustration: FIG. 148. PLANT LICE]
[Illustration: FIG. 149. CAGE IN WHICH TO BREED INSECTS
Flower-pot, lamp-chimney, and cloth]
SECTION XXXII. ORCHARD INSECTS
=The San Jose Scale.= The San Jose scale is one of the most dreaded
enemies of fruit trees. It is in fact an outlaw in many states. It is an
unlawful act to sell fruit trees affected by it. Fig. 150 shows a view
of a branch nearly covered with this pest. Although this scale is a very
minute animal, yet so rapidly does it multiply that it is very
dangerous to the tree. Never allow new trees to be brought into your
orchard until you feel certain that they are free from the San Jose
scale. If, however, it should in any way gain access to your orchard,
you can prevent its spreading by thorough spraying with what is known as
the lime-sulphur mixture. This mixture has long been used on the Pacific
coast as a remedy for various scale insects. When it was first tried in
other parts of the United States the results were not satisfactory and
its use was abandoned. However, later experiments with it have proved
that the mixture is thoroughly effective in killing this scale and that
it is perfectly harmless to the trees. Until the lime-sulphur mixture
proved to be successful the San Jose scale was a most dreaded nursery
and orchard foe. It was even thought necessary to destroy infected
trees. The lime-sulphur mixture and some other sulphur washes not only
kill the San Jose scale but are also useful in reducing fungous injury.
[Illustration: FIG. 150 SAN JOSE SCALE]
[Illustration: FIG. 151. SINGLE SAN JOSE SCALE
Magnified]
There are several ways of making the lime-sulphur mixture. It is
generally best to buy a prepared mixture from some trustworthy dealer.
If you find the scale on your trees, write to your state experiment
station for directions for combating it.
[Illustration: FIG. 152. THE CODLING MOTH
_a_, burrow of worm in apple; _b_, place where worm enters; _c_, place
where worm leaves; _e_, the larva; _d_, the pupa; _i_, the cocoon; _f_
and _g_, moths; _h_, magnified head of larva]
=The Codling Moth.= The codling moth attacks the apple and often causes
a loss of from twenty-five to seventy-five per cent of the crop. In the
state of New York this insect is causing an annual loss of about three
million dollars. The effect it has on the fruit is most clearly seen in
Fig. 152. The moth lays its egg upon the young leaves just after the
falling of the blossom. She flies on from apple to apple, depositing an
egg each time until from fifty to seventy-five eggs are deposited. The
larva, or "worm," soon hatches and eats its way into the apple. Many
affected apples ripen too soon and drop as "windfalls." Others remain on
the tree and become the common wormy apples so familiar to growers. The
larva that emerges from the windfalls moves generally to a tree, crawls
up the trunk, and spins its cocoon under a ridge in the bark. From the
cocoon the moth comes ready to start a new generation. The last
generation of the larvae spends the winter in the cocoon.
[Illustration: FIG. 153. SPRAYING THE ORCHARD BRINGS LUSCIOUS FRUIT
The picture in the corner at the top shows the right time to spray for
codling moth]
_Treatment._ Destroy orchard trash which may serve as a winter home.
Scrape all loose bark from the tree. Spray the tree with arsenate of
lead as soon as the flowers fall. A former method of fighting this pest
was as follows: bands of burlap four inches wide tied around the tree
furnished a hiding-place for larvae that came from windfalls or crawled
from wormy apples on the tree. The larvae caught under the bands were
killed every five or six days. We know now, however, that a thorough
spraying just after the blossoms fall kills the worms and renders the
bands unnecessary. Furthermore, spraying prevents wormy apples, while
banding does not. Follow the first spraying by a second two weeks later.
It is best to use lime-sulphur mixture or the Bordeaux mixture with
arsenate of lead for a spray. Thus one spraying serves against both
fungi and insects.
[Illustration: FIG. 154. PLUM CURCULIO
Larva, pupa, adult, and mark on the fruit. (Enlarged)]
=The Plum Curculio.= The plum curculio, sometimes called the plum
weevil, is a little creature about one fifth of an inch long. In spite
of its small size the curculio does, if neglected, great damage to our
fruit crop. It injures peaches, plums, and cherries by stinging the
fruit as soon as it is formed. The word "stinging" when applied to
insects--- and this case is no exception--means piercing the object
with the egg-layer (ovipositor) and depositing the egg. Some insects
occasionally use the ovipositor merely for defense. The curculio has an
especially interesting method of laying her egg. First she digs a hole,
in which she places the egg and pushes it well down. Then with her snout
she makes a crescent-shaped cut in the skin of the plum, around the egg.
This mark is shown in Fig. 154. As this peculiar cut is followed by a
flow of gum, you will always be able to recognize the work of the
curculio. Having finished with one plum, this industrious worker makes
her way to other plums until her eggs are all laid. The maggotlike larva
soon hatches, burrows through the fruit, and causes it to drop before
ripening. The larva then enters the ground to a depth of several inches.
There it becomes a pupa, and later, as a mature beetle, emerges and
winters in cracks and crevices.
[Illustration: FIG. 155. LEAF GALLS OF PHYLLOXERA ON CLINTON GRAPE LEAF]
_Treatment._ Burn orchard trash which may serve as winter quarters.
Spraying with arsenate of lead, using two pounds of the mixture to fifty
gallons of water, is the only successful treatment for the curculio. For
plums and peaches, spray first when the fruit is free from the calyx
caps, or dried flower-buds. Repeat the spraying two weeks later. For
late peaches spray a third time two weeks after the second spraying.
This poisonous spray will kill the beetles while they are feeding or
cutting holes in which to lay their eggs.
[Illustration: FIG. 156. THE CANKERWORM]
Fowls in the orchard do good by capturing the larvae before they can
burrow, while hogs will destroy the fallen fruit before the larvae can
escape.
=The Grape Phylloxera.= The grape phylloxera is a serious pest. You have
no doubt seen its galls upon the grape leaf. These galls are caused by a
small louse, the phylloxera. Each gall contains a female, which soon
fills the gall with eggs. These hatch into more females, which emerge
and form new galls, and so the phylloxera spreads (see Fig. 155).
_Treatment._ The Clinton grape is most liable to injury from this pest.
Hence it is better to grow other more resistant kinds. Sometimes the
lice attack the roots of the grape vines. In many sections where
irrigation is practiced the grape rows are flooded when the lice are
thickest. The water drowns the lice and does no harm to the vines.
=The Cankerworm.= The cankerworm is the larva of a moth. Because of its
peculiar mode of crawling, by looping its body, it is often called the
looping worm or measuring worm (Fig. 157, _c_). These worms are such
greedy eaters that in a short time they can so cut the leaves of an
orchard as to give it a scorched appearance. Such an attack practically
destroys the crop and does lasting injury to the tree. The worms are
green or brown and are striped lengthwise. If the tree is jarred, the
worm has a peculiar habit of dropping toward the ground on a silken
thread of its own making (Fig. 156).
[Illustration: FIG. 157. THE SPRING CANKERWORM
_a_, egg mass; _b_, egg, magnified; _c_, larva; _d_, female moth; _e_,
male moth]
In early summer the larvae burrow within the earth and pupate there;
later they emerge as adults (Fig. 157, _d_ and _e_). You observe the
peculiar difference between the wingless female, _d_, and the winged
male, _e_. It is the habit of this wingless female to crawl up the trunk
of some near-by tree in order to deposit her eggs upon the twigs. These
eggs (shown at _a_ and _b_) hatch into the greedy larvae that do so much
damage to our orchards.
Nearly all the common birds feed freely upon the cankerworm, and benefit
the orchard in so doing. The chickadee is perhaps the most useful. A
recent writer is very positive that each chickadee will devour on an
average thirty female cankerworm moths a day; and that if the average
number of eggs laid by each female is one hundred and eighty-five, one
chickadee would thus destroy in one day five thousand five hundred and
fifty eggs, and, in the twenty-five days in which the cankerworm moths
crawl up the tree, would rid the orchard of one hundred and thirty-eight
thousand seven hundred and fifty. These birds also eat immense numbers
of cankerworm eggs before they hatch into worms.
[Illustration: FIG. 158. EGGS OF THE FALL CANKERWORM]
_Treatment._ The inability of the female to fly gives us an easy way to
prevent the larval offspring from getting to the foliage of our trees,
for we know that the only highway open to her or her larvae leads up the
trunk. We must obstruct this highway so that no crawling creature may
pass. This is readily done by smoothing the bark and fitting close to it
a band of paper, and making sure that it is tight enough to prevent
anything from crawling underneath. Then smear over the paper something
so sticky that any moth or larva that attempts to pass will be
entangled. Printer's ink will do very well, or you can buy either
dendrolene or tanglefoot.
[Illustration: FIG. 159. APPLE-TREE TENT CATERPILLAR
_a_, eggs; _b_, cocoon; _c_, caterpillar]
Encourage the chickadee and all other birds, except the English sparrow,
to stay in your orchard. This is easily done by feeding and protecting
them in their times of need.
=The Apple-Tree Tent Caterpillar.= The apple-tree tent caterpillar is a
larva so well known that you only need to be told how to guard against
it. The mother of this caterpillar is a reddish moth. This insect passes
the winter in the egg state securely fastened on the twigs as shown in
Fig. 159, _a_.
_Treatment._ There are three principal methods, (1) Destroy the eggs.
The egg masses are readily seen in winter and may easily be collected
and burned by boys. The chickadee eats great quantities of these eggs.
(2) With torches burn the nests at dusk when all the worms are within.
You must be very careful in burning or you will harm the young branches
with their tender bark. (3) Encourage the residence of birds. Urge your
neighbors to make war on the larvae, too, since the pest spreads rapidly
from farm to farm. Regularly sprayed orchards are rarely troubled by
this pest.
[Illustration: FIG. 160. THE TWIG GIRDLER AT ITS DESTRUCTIVE WORK
_a_, the girdler; _b_, the egg-hole; _c_, the groove cut by girdler;
_e_, the egg]
=The Twig Girdler.= The twig girdler lays her eggs in the twigs of pear,
pecan, apple, and other trees. It is necessary that the larvae develop in
dead wood. This the mother provides by girdling the twig so deeply that
it will die and fall to the ground.
_Treatment._ Since the larvae spend the winter in the dead twigs, burn
these twigs in autumn or early spring and thus destroy the pest.
=The Peach-Tree Borer.= In Fig. 161 you see the effect of the peach-tree
borer's activity. These borers often girdle and thereby kill a tree.
Fig. 162 shows the adult state of the insect. The eggs are laid on peach
or plum trees near the ground. As soon as the larva emerges, it bores
into the bark and remains there for months, passing through the pupa
stage before it comes out to lay eggs for another generation.
[Illustration: FIG. 161. BORER SIGNS AROUND BASE OF PEACH TREE]
_Treatment._ If there are only a few trees in the orchard, digging the
worms out with a knife is the best way of destroying them. You can know
of the borer's presence by the exuding gum often seen on the tree-trunk.
If you pile earth around the roots early in the spring and remove it in
the late fall, the winter freezing and thawing will kill many of the
larvae.
=EXERCISE=
How many apples per hundred do you find injured by the codling
moth? Collect some cocoons from a pear or an apple tree in winter,
place in a breeding-cage, and watch for the moths that come out. Do
you ever see the woodpecker hunting for these same cocoons? Can you
find cocoons that have been emptied by this bird? Estimate how many
he considers a day's ration. How many apples does he thus save?
[Illustration: FIG. 162. PEACH-TREE BORERS, MALE AND FEMALE
Female with broad yellow band across abdomen]
Watch the curculio lay her eggs in the plums, peaches, or cherries.
What per cent of fruit is thus injured? Estimate the damage. Let
the school offer a prize for the greatest number of
tent-caterpillar eggs. Watch such trees as the apple, the wild and
the cultivated cherry, the oak, and many others.
Make a collection of insects injurious to orchard fruits, showing
in each case the whole life history of the insect, that is, eggs,
larva, pupa, and the mature insects.
[Illustration: THE TROUBLESOME CHINCH BUG (ENLARGED)
1, bugs on plant; 2, eggs; 3, young bug; 4 and 5, older bugs; 6,
long-winged bug; 7 and 8, short-winged bug]
SECTION XXXIII. GARDEN AND FIELD INSECTS
=The Cabbage Worm.= The cabbage worm of the early spring garden is a
familiar object, but you may not know that the innocent-looking little
white butterflies hovering about the cabbage patch are laying eggs which
are soon to hatch and make the dreaded cabbage worms. In Fig. 164 _a_
and _b_ show the common cabbage butterfly, _c_ shows several examples of
the caterpillar, and _d_ shows the pupa case. In the pupa stage the
insects pass the winter among the remains of old plants or in near-by
fences or in weeds or bushes. Cleaning up and burning all trash will
destroy many pupae and thus prevent many cabbage worms. In Fig. 164 _e_
and _f_ show the moth and zebra caterpillar; _g_ represents a moth which
is the parent of the small green worm shown at _h_. This worm is a
common foe of the cabbage plant.
[Illustration: FIG. 163. THE DREADED CHINCH BUG]
_Treatment._ Birds aid in the destruction of this pest. Paris green
mixed with air-slaked lime will also kill many larvae. After the cabbage
has headed, it is very difficult to destroy the worm, but pyrethrum
insect powder used freely is helpful.
=The Chinch Bug.= The chinch bug, attacking as it does such important
crops as wheat, corn, and grasses, is a well-known pest. It probably
causes more money loss than any other garden or field enemy. In Orange
county, North Carolina, farmers were once obliged to suspend
wheat-growing for two years on account of the chinch bug. In one year in
the state of Illinois this bug caused a loss of four million dollars.
[Illustration: FIG. 164. CABBAGE WORMS AND BUTTERFLIES]
_Treatment._ Unfortunately we cannot prevent all of the damage done by
chinch bugs, but we can diminish it somewhat by good clean agriculture.
Destroy the winter homes of the insect by burning dry grass, leaves, and
rubbish in fields and fence rows. Although the insect has wings, it
seldom or never uses them, usually traveling on foot; therefore a deep
furrow around the field to be protected will hinder or stop the progress
of an invasion. The bugs fall into the bottom of the furrow, and may
there be killed by dragging a log up and down the furrow. Write to the
Division of Entomology, Washington, for bulletins on the chinch bug.
Other methods of prevention are to be found in these bulletins.
[Illustration: FIG. 165. A PLANT LOUSE COLONY]
=The Plant Louse.= The plant louse is very small, but it multiplies with
very great rapidity. During the summer the young are born alive, and it
is only toward fall that eggs are laid. The individuals that hatch from
eggs are generally wingless females, and their young, born alive, are
both winged and wingless. The winged forms fly to other plants and start
new colonies. Plant lice mature in from eight to fourteen days.
The plant louse gives off a sweetish fluid of which some ants are very
fond. You may often see the ants stroking these lice to induce them to
give off a freer flow of the "honey dew." This is really a method of
milking. However friendly and useful these "cows" may be to the ant,
they are enemies to man in destroying so many of his plants.
_Treatment._ These are sucking insects. Poisons therefore do not avail.
They may be killed by spraying with kerosene emulsion or a strong soap
solution or with tobacco water. Lice on cabbages are easily killed by a
mixture of one pound of lye soap in four gallons of warm water.
[Illustration: FIG. 166. A CHEAP SPRAYING OUTFIT]
=The Squash Bug.= The squash bug does its greatest damage to young
plants. To such its attack is often fatal. On larger plants single
leaves may die. This insect is a serious enemy to a crop and is
particularly difficult to get rid of, since it belongs to the class of
sucking insects, not to the biting insects. For this reason poisons are
useless.
[Illustration: FIG. 167. A SQUASH BUG]
_Treatment._ About the only practicable remedy is to pick these insects
by hand. We can, however, protect our young plants by small nettings and
thus tide them over the most dangerous period of their lives. These bugs
greatly prefer the squash as food. You can therefore diminish their
attack on your melons, cucumbers, etc. by planting among the melons an
occasional squash plant as a "trap plant." Hand picking will be easier
on a few trap plants than over the whole field. A small board or large
leaf laid beside the young plant often furnishes night shelter for the
bugs. The bugs collected under the board may easily be killed every
morning.
=The Flea-Beetle.= The flea-beetle inflicts much damage on the potato,
tomato, eggplant, and other garden plants. The accompanying figure shows
the common striped flea-beetle which lives on the tomato. The larva of
this beetle lives inside of the leaves, mining its way through the leaf
in a real tunnel. Any substance disagreeable to the beetle, such as
plaster, soot, ashes, or tobacco, will repel its attacks on the garden
crops.
[Illustration: FIG. 168. FLEA-BEETLE AND LARVA
_a_, larva; _b_, adult. Lines on sides show real length of insects]
=The Weevil.= The weevil is commonly found among seeds. Its attacks are
serious, but the insect may easily be destroyed.
_Treatment._ Put the infected seeds in an air-tight box or bin, placing
on the top of the pile a dish containing carbon disulphide, a
tablespoonful to a bushel of seeds. The fumes of this substance are
heavy and will pass through the mass of seeds below and kill all the
weevils and other animals there. The bin should be closely covered with
canvas or heavy cloth to prevent the fumes from being carried away by
the air. Let the seeds remain thus from two to five days. Repeat the
treatment if any weevils are found alive. Fumigate when the temperature
is 70 deg. Fahrenheit or above. In cold weather or in a loose bin the
treatment is not successful. _Caution:_ Do not approach the bin with a
light, since the fumes of the chemical used are highly inflammable.
=The Hessian Fly.= The Hessian fly does more damage to the wheat crop
than all other insects combined, and probably ranks next to the chinch
bug as the second worst insect enemy of the farmer. It was probably
introduced into this country by the Hessian troops in the War of the
Revolution.
[Illustration: FIG. 169. THE HESSIAN FLY]
In autumn the insect lays its eggs in the leaves of the wheat. These
hatch into the larvae, which move down into the crown of the plant, where
they pass the winter. There they cause on the plant a slight gall
formation, which injures or kills the plant. In the spring adult flies
emerge and lay eggs. The larvae that hatch feed in the lower joints of
the growing wheat and prevent its proper growth. These larvae pupate and
remain as pupae in the wheat stubble during the summer. The fall brood of
flies appears shortly before the first heavy frost.
_Treatment._ Burn all stubble and trash during July and August. If the
fly is very bad, it is well to leave the stubble unusually high to
insure a rapid spread of the fire. Burn refuse from the
threshing-machine, since this often harbors many larvae or pupae. Follow
the burning by deep plowing, because the burning cannot reach the
insects that are in the base of the plants. Delay the fall planting
until time for heavy frosts.
=The Potato Beetle; Tobacco Worm.= The potato beetle, tobacco worm,
etc., are too well known to need description. Suffice it to say that no
good farmer will neglect to protect his crop from any pest that
threatens it.
The increase, owing to various causes, of insects, of fungi, of
bacterial diseases, makes a study of these pests, of their origin, and
of their prevention a necessary part of a successful farmer's training.
Tillage alone will no longer render orchard, vineyard, and garden
fruitful. Protection from every form of plant enemies must be added to
tillage.
[Illustration: FIG. 170. SPRAYING THE ORCHARD
One way of increasing the yield of fruit]
In dealing with plants, as with human beings, the great object should be
not the cure but the prevention of disease. If disease can be prevented,
it is far too costly to wait for it to develop and then to attempt its
cure. Men of science are studying the new forms of diseases and new
insects as fast as they appear. These men are finding ways of fighting
old and new enemies. Young people who expect to farm should early learn
to follow their advice.
=EXERCISE=
How does the squash bug resemble the plant louse? Is this a true
bug? Gather some eggs and watch the development of the insects in a
breeding-cage. Estimate the damage done to some crops by the
flea-beetle. What is the best method of prevention?
[Illustration: FIG. 171. AN APPLE TREE SHOWING PROPER CARE]
Do you know the large moth that is the mother of the tobacco worm?
You may often see her visiting the blossoms of the Jimson weed.
Some tobacco-growers cultivate a few of these weeds in a tobacco
field. In the blossom they place a little cobalt or "fly-stone" and
sirup. When the tobacco-worm moth visits this flower and sips the
poisoned nectar, she will of course lay no more troublesome eggs.
SECTION XXXIV. THE COTTON-BOLL WEEVIL
So far as known, the cotton-boll weevil, an insect which is a native of
the tropics, crossed the Rio Grande River into Texas in 1891 and 1892.
It settled in the cotton fields around Brownsville. Since then it has
widened its destructive area until now it has invaded the whole
territory shown by the map on page 177.
[Illustration: FIG. 172. ADULT COTTON-BOLL WEEVIL
Enlarged]
This weevil is a small gray or reddish-brown snout-beetle hardly over a
quarter of an inch in length. In proportion to its length it has a long
beak. It belongs to a family of beetles which breed in pods, in seeds,
and in stalks of plants. It is a greedy eater, but feeds only on the
cotton plant.
The grown weevils try to outlive the cold of winter by hiding snugly
away under grass clumps, cotton-stalks, rubbish, or under the bark of
trees. Sometimes they go down into holes in the ground. A comfortable
shelter is often found in the forests near the cotton fields, especially
in the moss on the trees. The weevils can stand a good deal of cold, but
fortunately many are killed by winter weather. Moreover birds destroy
many; hence by spring the last year's crop is very greatly diminished.
In the spring, generally about the time cotton begins to form "squares,"
the weevils shake off their long winter sleep and enter the cotton
fields with appetites as sharp as razors. Then shortly the females begin
to lay eggs. At first these eggs are laid only in the squares, and
generally only one to the square. The young grub hatches from these eggs
in two or three days. The newly hatched grub eats the inside of the
square, and the square soon falls to the ground. Entire fields may at
times be seen without a single square on the plants. Of course no fruit
can be formed without squares.
[Illustration: FIG. 173. EGGS AMONG THE ANTHERS OF A SQUARE AT THE
POINT INDICATED BY THE ARROW]
[Illustration: FIG. 174. CROSS SECTION SHOWING ANTHERS OF A SQUARE
WITH EGG OF WEEVIL, AND SHOWING THE HOLE WHERE THE EGG WAS DEPOSITED
Greatly enlarged]
In from one to two weeks the grub or larva becomes fully grown and,
without changing its home, is transformed into the pupa state. Then in
about a week more the pupae come out as adult weevils and attack the
bolls. They puncture them with their snouts and lay their eggs in the
bolls. The young grubs, this time hatching out in the boll, remain there
until grown, when they emerge through holes that they make. These holes
allow dampness to enter and destroy the bolls. This life-round continues
until cold weather drives the insects to their winter quarters. By that
time they have increased so rapidly that there is often one for every
boll in the field.
[Illustration: FIG. 175. THE LARVA OF THE COTTON-BOLL WEEVIL
INJURING A SQUARE]
This weevil is proving very hard to destroy. At present there seem but
few ways to fight it. One is to grow cotton that will mature too early
for the weevils to do it much harm. A second is to kill as many weevils
as possible by burning the homes that shelter them in winter.
[Illustration: FIG. 176. PUPA OF COTTON-BOLL WEEVIL FROM ABOVE AND BELOW
Greatly enlarged]
[Illustration: FIG. 177. THE PUPA OF THE COTTON-BOLL WEEVIL IN A SQUARE]
The places best adapted for a winter home for the weevil are trash
piles, rubbish, driftwood, rotten wood, weeds, moss on trees, etc. A
further help, therefore, in destroying the weevil is to cut down and
burn all cotton-stalks as soon as the cotton is harvested.
[Illustration: FIG. 178. A COTTON BOLL WITH FEEDING-HOLES OF WEEVIL,
AND BEARING THREE SPECIMENS OF THE INSECT]
[Illustration: FIG. 179. THE MEXICAN COTTON-BOLL WEEVIL,
SHOWING STRUCTURE]
This destroys countless numbers of larvae and pupae in the bolls and
greatly reduces the number of weevils. In addition, all cornstalks, all
trash, all large clumps of grass in neighboring fields, should be
burned, so as to destroy these winter homes of the weevil. Also avoid
planting cotton near trees. The bark, moss, and fallen leaves of the
tree furnish a winter shelter for the weevils.
[Illustration: FIG. 180. A SERIES OF FULL GROWN WEEVILS, SHOWING
VARIATIONS IN SIZE]
A third help in destroying the weevil is to rotate crops. If cotton does
not follow cotton, the weevil has nothing on which to feed the second
year.
[Illustration: FIG. 181. MAP SHOWING DISTRIBUTION OF THE COTTON-BOLL
WEEVIL IN 1913]
In adopting the first method mentioned the cotton growers have found
that by the careful selection of seed, by early planting, by a free use
of fertilizers containing phosphoric acid, and by frequent plowing, they
can mature a crop about thirty days earlier than they usually do. In
this way a good crop can be harvested before the weevils are ready to be
most destructive.
CHAPTER VIII
FARM CROPS
Every crop of the farm has been changed and improved in many ways since
its forefathers were wild plants. Those plants that best serve the needs
of the farmer and of farm animals have undergone the most changes and
have received also the greatest care and attention in their production
and improvement.
While we have many different kinds of farm crops, the cultivated soil of
the world is occupied by a very few. In our country the crop that is
most valuable and that occupies the greatest land area is generally
known as the _grass crop_. Included in the general term "grass crop" are
the grasses and clovers that are used for pasturage as well as for hay.
Next to grass in value come the great cereal, corn, and the most
important fiber crop, cotton, closely followed by the great bread crop,
wheat. Oats rank fifth in value, potatoes sixth, and tobacco seventh.
(These figures are for 1913.)
Success in growing any crop is largely due to the suitableness of soil
and climate to that crop. When the planter selects both the most
suitable soil and the most suitable climate for each crop, he gets not
only the most bountiful yield from the crop but, in addition, he gets
the most desirable quality of product. A little careful observation and
study soon teach what kinds of soil produce crops of the highest
excellence. This learned, the planter is able to grow in each field the
several crops best adapted to that special type of soil. Thus we have
tobacco soils, trucking soils, wheat and corn soils. Dairying can be
most profitably followed in sections where crops like cowpeas, clover,
alfalfa, and corn are peculiarly at home. No one should try to grow a
new crop in his section until he has found out whether the crop which he
wants to grow is adapted to his soil and his climate.
[Illustration: FIG. 182. ALFALFA IN THE STACK
This is the second cutting of the season]
The figures below give the average amount of money made annually an acre
on our chief crops:
Flowers and plants, $1911; nursery products, $261; onions, $140; sugar
cane, $55; small fruits, $110; hops, $175; vegetables, $78; tobacco,
$80; sweet potatoes, $55; hemp, $53; potatoes, $78; sugar beets, $54;
sorghum cane, $22; cotton, $22; orchard fruits, $110; peanuts, $21;
flax-seed, $14; cereals, $14; hay and forage, $11; castor beans, $6
(United States Census Report).
SECTION XXXV. COTTON
Although cotton was cultivated on the Eastern continent before America
was discovered, this crop owes its present kingly place in the business
world to the zeal and intelligence of its American growers. So great an
influence does it wield in modern industrial life that it is often
called King Cotton. Thousands upon thousands of people scan the
newspapers each day to see what price its staple is bringing. From its
bounty a vast army of toilers, who plant its seed, who pick its bolls,
who gin its staple, who spin and weave its lint, who grind its seed, who
refine its oil, draw daily bread. Does not its proper production deserve
the best thought that can be given it?
In the cotton belt almost any well-drained soil will produce cotton. The
following kinds of soil are admirably suited to this plant: red and gray
loams with good clay subsoil; sandy soils over clay and sandstone and
limestone; rich, well-drained bottom-lands. The safest soils are medium
loams. Cotton land must always be well drained.
Cotton was originally a tropical plant, but, strange to say, it seems to
thrive best in temperate zones. The cotton plant does best, according to
Newman, in climates which have (1) six months of freedom from frost; (2)
a moderate, well-distributed rainfall during the plant's growing period;
and (3) abundant sunshine and little rain during the plant's maturing
period.
[Illustration: FIG. 183. GROWTH OF COTTON FROM DAY TO DAY
In America the Southern states from Virginia to Texas have these
climatic qualities, and it is in these states that the cotton industry
has been developed until it is one of the giant industries of the world.
This development has been very rapid. As late as 1736 the cotton plant
was grown as an ornamental flowering plant in many front yards; in
1911, 16,250,276 bales of cotton were grown in the South. In recent
years the soil and climate of lower California and parts of Arizona and
New Mexico have been found well adapted to cotton.
[Illustration: FIG. 184. COTTON IN THE GROWING SEASON]
There are a great many varieties of cotton. Two types are mainly grown
by the practical American farmer. These are the short-stapled, upland
variety most commonly grown in all the Southern states, and the
beautiful, long-stapled, black-seeded sea-island type that grows upon
the islands and a portion of the mainland of Georgia, South Carolina,
and Florida. The air of the coast seems necessary for the production of
this latter variety. The seeds of the sea-island cotton are small,
smooth, and black. They are so smooth and stick so loosely to the lint
that they are separated from it by roller-gins instead of by saw-gins.
When these seeds are planted away from the soil and air of their ocean
home, the plant does not thrive.
Many attempts have been made and are still being made to increase the
length of the staple of the upland types. The methods used are as
follows: selection of seed having a long fiber; special cultivation and
fertilization; crossing the short-stapled cotton on the long-stapled
cotton. This last process, as already explained, is called
_hybridizing_. Many of these attempts have succeeded, and there are now
a large number of varieties which excel the older varieties in
profitable yield. The new varieties are each year being more widely
grown. Every farmer should study the new types and select the one that
will best suit his land. The new types have been developed under the
best tillage. Therefore if a farmer would keep the new type as good as
it was when he began to grow it, he must give it the same good tillage,
and practice seed-selection.
[Illustration: FIG. 185. COTTON READY FOR PICKING]
The cotton plant is nourished by a tap-root that will seek food as
deeply as loose earth will permit the root to penetrate; hence, in
preparing land for this crop the first plowing should be done at least
with a two-horse plow and should be deep and thorough. This deep plowing
not only allows the tap-root to penetrate, but it also admits a
circulation of air.
On some cotton farms it is the practice to break the land in winter or
early spring and then let it lie naked until planting-time. This is not
a good practice. The winter rains wash more plant food out of
unprotected soil than a single crop would use. It would be better, in
the late summer or fall, to plant crimson clover or some other
protective and enriching crop on land that is to be planted in cotton in
the spring. This crop, in addition to keeping the land from being
injuriously washed, would greatly help the coming cotton crop by leaving
the soil full of vegetable matter.
In preparing for cotton-planting, first disk the land thoroughly, then
break with a heavy plow and harrow until a fine and mellow seed-bed is
formed. Do not spare the harrow at this time. It destroys many a weed
that, if allowed to grow, would have to be cut by costly hoeing.
Thorough work before planting saves much expensive work in the later
days of the crop. Moreover, no man can afford to allow his plant food
and moisture to go to nourish weeds, even for a short time.
The rows should be from three to four feet apart. The width depends upon
the richness of the soil. On rich land the rows should be at least four
feet apart. This width allows the luxuriant plant to branch and fruit
well. On poorer lands the distance of the rows should not be so great.
The distribution of the seed in the row is of course most cheaply done
by the planter. As a rule it is best not to ridge the land for the seed.
Flat culture saves moisture and often prevents damage to the roots. In
some sections, however, where the land is flat and full of water,
ridging seems necessary if the land cannot be drained.
[Illustration: FIG. 186. PICKING COTTON]
The cheapest way of cultivating a crop is to prevent grass and weeds
from rooting, not to wait to destroy them after they are well rooted. To
do this, it is well to run the two-horse smoothing-harrow over the
land, across the rows, a few days after the young plants are up. Repeat
the harrowing in six or eight days. In addition to destroying the young
grass and weeds, this harrowing also removes many of the young cotton
plants and thereby saves much hoeing at "chopping-out" time. When the
plants are about two inches high they are "chopped out" to secure an
evenly distributed stand. It has been the custom to leave two stalks to
a hill, but many growers are now leaving only one.
The number of times the crop has to be worked depends on the soil and
the season. If the soil is dry and porous, cultivate as often as
possible, especially after each rain. Never allow a crust to form after
a rain; the roots of plants must have air. Cultivation after each rain
forms a dry mulch on the top of the soil and thus prevents rapid
evaporation of moisture.
If the fiber (the lint) only is removed from the land on which cotton is
grown, cotton is the least exhaustive of the great crops grown in the
United States. According to some recent experiments an average crop of
cotton removes in the lint only 2.75 pounds of nitrogen, phosphoric
acid, potash, lime, and magnesia per acre, while a crop of ten bushels
of wheat per acre removes 32.36 pounds of the same elements of plant
food. Inasmuch as this crop takes so little plant food from the soil,
the cotton-farmer has no excuse for allowing his land to decrease in
productiveness. Two things will keep his land in bounteous harvest
condition: first, let him return the seeds in some form to the land, or,
what is better, feed the ground seeds to cattle, make a profit from the
cattle, and return manure to the land in place of the seeds; second, at
the last working, let him sow some crop like crimson clover or rye in
the cotton rows to protect the soil during the winter and to leave humus
in the ground for the spring.
The stable manure, if that is used, should be broadcasted over the
fields at the rate of six to ten tons an acre. If commercial fertilizers
are used, it may be best to make two applications. To give the young
plants a good start, apply a portion of the fertilizer in the drill just
before planting. Then when the first blooms appear, put the remainder of
the fertilizer in drills near the plants but not too close. Many good
cotton-growers, however, apply all the fertilizer at one time.
[Illustration: FIG. 187. WEIGHING A DAY'S PICKING OF COTTON]
_Relation of Stock to the Cotton Crop_. On many farms much of the money
for which the cotton is sold in the fall has to go to pay for the
commercial fertilizer used in growing the crop. Should not this fact
suggest efforts to raise just as good crops without having to buy so
much fertilizer? Is there any way by which this can be done? The
following suggestions may be helpful. Raise enough stock to use all the
cotton seed grown on the farm. To go with the food made from the cotton
seed, grow on the farm pea-vine hay, clover, alfalfa, and other such
nitrogen-gathering crops. This can be done at small cost. What will be
the result?
First, to say nothing of the money made from the cattle, the large
quantity of stable manure saved will largely reduce the amount of
commercial fertilizer needed. The cotton-farmer cannot afford to neglect
cattle-raising. The cattle sections of the country are likely to make
the greatest progress in agriculture, because they have manure always on
hand.
[Illustration: FIG. 188. MODERN COTTON BALES]
Second, the nitrogen-gathering crops, while helping to feed the stock,
also reduce the fertilizer bills by supplying one of the costly elements
of the fertilizer. The ordinary cotton fertilizer consists principally
of nitrogen, of potash, and of phosphoric acid. Of these three, by far
the most costly is nitrogen. Now peas, beans, clover, and peanuts will
leave enough nitrogen in the soil for cotton, so that if they are
raised, it is necessary to buy only phosphoric acid and sometimes
potash.
SECTION XXXVI. TOBACCO
The tobacco plant connects Indian agriculture with our own. It has
always been a source of great profit to our people. In the early
colonial days tobacco was almost the only money crop. Many rich men came
to America in those days merely to raise tobacco.
Although tobacco will grow in almost any climate, the leaves, which, as
most of you know, are the salable part of the plant, get their desirable
or undesirable qualities very largely from the soil and from the climate
in which they grow.
The soil in which tobacco thrives best is one which has the following
qualities: dryness, warmth, richness, depth, and sandiness.
Commercial fertilizers also are almost a necessity; for, as tobacco land
is limited in area, the same land must be often planted in tobacco.
Hence even a fresh, rich soil that did not at first require fertilizing
soon becomes exhausted, and, after the land has been robbed of its plant
food by crop after crop of tobacco, frequent application of fertilizers
and other manures becomes necessary. However, even tobacco growers
should rotate their crops as much as possible.
[Illustration: FIG. 189. A LEAF OF TOBACCO]
Deep plowing--from nine to thirteen inches--is also a necessity in
preparing the land, for tobacco roots go deep into the soil. After this
deep plowing, harrow until the soil is thoroughly pulverized and is as
fine and mellow as that of the flower-garden.
Unlike most other farm crops the tobacco plant must be started first in
a seed-bed. To prepare a tobacco bed the almost universal custom has
been to proceed as follows. Carefully select a protected spot. Over this
spot pile brushwood and then burn it. The soil will be left dry, and all
the weed seeds will be killed. The bed is then carefully raked and
smoothed and planted. Some farmers are now preparing their beds without
burning. A tablespoonful of seed will sow a patch twenty-five feet
square. A cheap cloth cover is put over the bed. If the seeds come up
well, a patch of this size ought to furnish transplants for five or six
acres. In sowing, it is not wise to cover the seed deeply. A light
raking in or an even rolling of the ground is all that is needed.
[Illustration: FIG. 190. A PROMISING CROP OF TOBACCO]
The time required for sprouting is from two to three weeks. The plants
ought to be ready for transplanting in from four to six weeks. Weeds
and grass should of course be kept out of the seed-bed.
The plants, when ready, are transplanted in very much the same way as
cabbages and tomatoes. The transplanting was formerly done by hand, but
an effective machine is now widely used. The rows should be from three
to three and a half feet apart, and the plants in the rows about two or
three feet apart. If the plants are set so that the plow and cultivator
can be run with the rows and also across the rows, they can be more
economically worked. Tobacco, like corn, requires shallow cultivation.
Of course the plants should be worked often enough to give clean culture
and to provide a soil mulch for saving moisture.
[Illustration: FIG. 191. TOPPING TOBACCO]
In tobacco culture it is necessary to pinch off the "buttons" and to cut
off the tops of the main stalk, else much nourishment that should go to
the leaves will be given to the seeds. The suckers must also be cut off
for the same reason.
The proper time for harvesting is not easily fixed; one becomes skillful
in this work only through experience in the field. Briefly, we may say
that tobacco is ready to be cut when the leaves on being held up to the
sun show a light or golden color, when they are sticky to the touch, and
when they break easily on being bent. Plants that are overripe are
inferior to those that are cut early.
The operations included in cutting, housing, drying, shipping, sweating,
and packing require skill and practice.
SECTION XXXVII. WHEAT
Wheat has been cultivated from earliest times. It was a chief crop in
Egypt and Palestine, and still holds its importance in the temperate
portions of Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, and America.
[Illustration: FIG. 192. A HAND]
[Illustration: FIG. 193. WHEAT HEADS]
This crop ranks third in value in the United States. It grows in cool,
in temperate, and in warm climates, and in many kinds of soil. It does
best in clay loam, and worst in sandy soils. Clogged and water-soaked
land will not grow wheat with profit to the farmer; for this reason,
where good wheat-production is desired the soil must be well drained
and in good physical condition--that is, the soil must be open, crumbly,
and mellow.
Clay soils that are hard and lifeless can be made valuable for
wheat-production by covering the surface with manure, by good tillage,
and by a thorough system of crop-rotation. Cowpeas and other legumes
make a most valuable crop to precede wheat, for in growing they add
atmospheric nitrogen to the soil, and their roots loosen the root-bed,
thereby admitting a free circulation of air and adding humus to the
soil. Moreover, the legumes leave the soil with its grains fairly close
packed, and this is a help in wheat growing.
One may secure a good seed-bed after cotton and corn as well as after
cowpeas and other legumes. They are summer-cultivated crops, and the
clean culture that has been given them renders the surface soil mellow
and the undersoil firm and compact. They are not so good, however, as
cowpeas, since they add no atmospheric nitrogen to the soil, as all
leguminous crops do.
[Illustration: FIG. 194. ROOTS OF A SINGLE WHEAT PLANT]
From one to two inches is the most satisfactory depth for planting
wheat. The largest number of seeds comes up when planted at this depth.
A mellow soil is very helpful to good coming up and provides a most
comfortable home for the roots of the plant. A compact soil below makes
a moist undersoil; and this is desirable, for the soil water is needed
to dissolve plant food and to carry it up through the plant, where it is
used in building tissue.
There are a great many varieties of wheat: some are bearded, others are
smooth; some are winter and others are spring varieties. The
smooth-headed varieties are most agreeable to handle during harvest and
at threshing-time. Some of the bearded varieties, however, do so well in
some soils and climates that it is desirable to continue growing them,
though they are less agreeable to handle. No matter what variety you are
accustomed to raise, it may be improved by careful seed-selection.
[Illustration: FIG. 195. SELECTING WHEAT SEED]
The seed-drill is the best implement for planting wheat. It distributes
the grains evenly over the whole field and leaves the mellow soil in a
condition to catch what snow may fall and secure what protection it
affords.
[Illustration: FIG. 196. ADJOINING WHEAT FIELDS
The yield of the lower field, forty-five bushels per acre, is due to
intelligent farming]
In many parts of the country, because not enough live stock is raised,
there is often too little manure to apply to the wheat land. Where this
is the case commercial fertilizers must be used. Since soils differ
greatly, it is impossible to suggest a fertilizer adapted to all soils.
The elements usually lacking in wheat soils are nitrogen, phosphoric
acid, and potash. The land may be lacking in one of these plant foods or
in all; in either case a maximum crop cannot possibly be raised. The
section on manuring the soil will be helpful to the wheat-grower.
[Illustration: FIG. 197. A BOUNTIFUL CROP OF WHEAT]
It should be remembered always in buying fertilizers for wheat that
whenever wheat follows cowpeas or clover or other legumes there is
seldom need of using nitrogen in the fertilizer; the tubercles on the
pea or clover roots will furnish that. Hence, as a rule, only potash and
phosphoric acid will have to be purchased as plant food.
The farmer is assisted always by a study of his crop and by a knowledge
of how it grows. If he find the straw inferior and short, it means that
the soil is deficient in nitrogen; but on the other hand, if the straw
be luxuriant and the heads small and poorly filled, he may be sure that
his soil contains too little phosphoric acid and potash.
=EXERCISE=
Let the pupils secure several heads of wheat and thresh each
separately by hand. The grains should then be counted and their
plumpness and size observed. The practical importance of this is
obvious, for the larger the heads and the greater the number of
grains, the larger the yield per acre. Let them plant some of the
large and some of the small grains. A single test of this kind will
show the importance of careful seed-selection.
[Illustration: FIG. 198 A WIDELY GROWN CROP]
SECTION XXXVIII. CORN
When the white man came to this country he found the Indians using corn;
for this reason, in addition to its name _maize_, it is called _Indian
corn_. Before that time the civilized world did not know that there was
such a crop. The increase in the yield and the extension of the acres
planted in this strictly American crop have kept pace with the rapid
and wonderful growth of our country. Corn is king of the cereals and the
most important crop of American agriculture. It grows in almost every
section of America. There is hardly any limit to the uses to which its
grain and its stalks are now put. Animals of many kinds are fed on
rations into which it enters. Its grains in some form furnish food to
more people than does any other crop except possibly rice. Its stalk and
its cob are manufactured into many different and useful articles.
A soil rich in either decaying animal or vegetable matter, loose, warm,
and moist but not wet, will produce a better crop of corn than any
other. Corn soil should always be well tilled and cultivated.
The proper time to begin the cultivation of corn is before it is
planted. Plow well. A shallow, worn-out soil should not be used for
corn, but for cowpeas or rye. After thorough plowing, the harrow--either
the disk or spring-tooth--should be used to destroy all clods and leave
the surface mellow and fine. The best results will be obtained by
turning under a clover sod that has been manured from the savings of the
barnyard.
When manure is not available, commercial fertilizers will often prove
profitable on poor lands. Careful trials will best determine how much
fertilizer to an acre is necessary, and what kinds are to be used. A
little study and experimenting on the farmer's part will soon enable him
to find out both the kind and the amount of fertilizer that is best
suited to his land.
The seed for this crop should be selected according to the plan
suggested in Section XIX.
[Illustration: FIG. 199. CORN SHOCKED FOR THE SHREDDER]
The most economical method of planting is by means of the horse planter,
which, according to its adjustment, plants regularly in hills or in
drills. A few days after planting, the cornfield should be harrowed with
a fine-tooth harrow to loosen the top soil and to kill the grass and the
weed seeds that are germinating at the surface. When the corn plants
are from a half inch to an inch high, the harrow may again be used. A
little work before the weeds sprout will save many days of labor during
the rest of the season, and increase the yield.
[Illustration: FIG. 200. THE DIFFERENCE IS DUE TO TILLAGE]
Corn is a crop that needs constant cultivation, and during the growing
season the soil should be stirred at least four times. This cultivation
is for three reasons:
1. To destroy weeds that would take plant food and water.
2. To provide a mulch of dry soil so as to prevent the evaporation of
moisture. The action of this mulch has already been explained.
3. Because "tillage is manure." Constant stirring of the soil allows the
air to circulate in it, provides a more effective mulch, and helps to
change unavailable plant food into the form that plants use.
Deep culture of corn is not advisable. The roots in their early stages
of growth are shallow feeders and spread widely only a few inches below
the surface. The cultivation that destroys or disturbs the roots injures
the plants and lessens the yield. We cultivate because of the three
reasons given above, and not to stir the soil about the roots or to
loosen it there.
[Illustration: FIG. 201.]
In many parts of the country the cornstalks are left standing in the
fields or are burned. This is a great mistake, for the stalks are worth
a good deal for feeding horses, cattle, and sheep. These stalks may
always be saved by the use of the husker and shredder. Corn after being
matured and cut can be put in shocks and left thus until dry enough to
run through the husker and shredder. This machine separates the corn
from the stalk and husks it. At the same time it shreds tops, leaves,
and butts into a food that is both nutritious and palatable to stock.
For the amount that animals will eat, almost as much feeding value is
obtained from corn stover treated in this way as from timothy hay. The
practice of not using the stalks is wasteful and is fast being
abandoned. The only reason that so much good food is being left to decay
in the field is because so many people have not fully learned the
feeding value of the stover.
=EXERCISE=
To show the effect of cultivation on the yield of corn, let the
pupils lay off five plats in some convenient field. Each plat need
consist of only two rows about twenty feet long. Treat each plat as
follows:
Plat 1. No cultivation: let weeds grow.
Plat 2. Mulch with straw.
Plat 3. Shallow cultivation: not deeper than two inches and at
least five times during the growing season.
Plat 4. Deep cultivation: at least four inches deep, so as to
injure and tear out some of the roots (this is a common method).
Plat 5. Root-pruning: ten inches from the stalk and six inches
deep, prune the roots with a long knife. Cultivate five times
during the season.
Observe plats during the summer, and at husking-time note results.
SECTION XXXIX. PEANUTS
This plant is rich in names, being known locally as "ground pea,"
"goober," "earthnut," and "pindar," as well as generally by the name of
"peanut." The peanut is a true legume, and, like other legumes, bears
nitrogen-gathering tubercles upon its roots. The fruit is not a real nut
but rather a kind of pea or bean, and develops from the blossom. After
the fall of the blossom the "spike," or flower-stalk, pushes its way
into the ground, where the nut develops. If unable to penetrate the soil
the nut dies.
In the United States, North and South Carolina, Virginia, and Tennessee
have the most favorable climates for peanut culture. Suitable climate
and soil, however, may be found from New Jersey to the Mississippi
valley. A high, porous, sandy loam is the most suitable. Stiffer soils,
which may in some cases yield larger crops than the loams, are yet not
so profitable, for stiff soils injure the color of the nut. Lime is a
necessity and must be supplied if the soil is deficient. Phosphoric acid
and potash are needed.
Greater care than is usually bestowed should be given to the selection
of the peanut seed. In addition to following the principles given in
Section XVIII, all musty, defective seeds must be avoided and all
frosted kernels must be rejected. Before it dries, the peanut seed is
easily injured by frost. The slightest frost on the vines, either before
or after the plants are dug, does much harm to the tender seed.
[Illustration: FIG. 202. A PEANUT PLANT]
In growing peanuts, thorough preparation of the soil is much better than
later cultivation. Destroy the crop of young weeds, but do not disturb
the peanut crop by late cultivation. Harvest before frost, and shock
high to keep the vines from the ground.
The average yield of peanuts in the United States is twenty-two bushels
an acre. In Tennessee the yield is twenty-nine bushels an acre, and in
North Carolina and Virginia it reaches thirty bushels an acre.
SECTION XL. SWEET POTATOES
The roots of sweet potatoes are put on the market in various forms.
Aside from the form in which they are ordinarily sold, some potatoes are
dried and then ground into flour, some are canned, some are used to make
starch, some furnish a kind of sugar called glucose, and some are even
used to make alcohol.
The fact that there are over eighty varieties of potatoes shows the
popularity of the plant. Now it is evident that all of these varieties
cannot be equally desirable. Hence the wise grower will select his
varieties with prudent forethought. He should study his market, his
soil, and his seed (see Section XVIII).
[Illustration: FIG. 203. SWEET POTATOES]
Four months of mild weather, months free from frost and cold winds, are
necessary for the growing of sweet potatoes. In a mild climate almost
any loose, well-drained soil will produce them. A light, sandy loam,
however, gives a cleaner potato and one, therefore, that sells better.
The sweet potato draws potash, nitrogen, and phosphoric acid from the
soil, but in applying these as fertilizers the grower must study and
know his own soil. If he does not he may waste both money and plant food
by the addition of elements already present in sufficient quantity in
the soil. The only way to come to reliable conclusions as to the needs
of the soil is to try two or three different kinds of fertilizers on
plats of the same soil, during the same season, and notice the resulting
crop of potatoes.
Sweet potatoes will do well after almost any of the usual field crops.
This caution, however, should be borne in mind. Potatoes should not
follow a sod. This is because sods are often thick with cutworms, one of
the serious enemies of the potato.
It is needless to say that the ground must be kept clean by thorough
cultivation until the vines take full possession of the field.
In harvesting, extreme care should be used to avoid cutting and bruising
the potato, since bruises are as dangerous to a sweet potato as to an
apple, and render decay almost a certainty. Lay aside all bruised
potatoes for immediate use.
For shipment the potatoes should be graded and packed with care. An
extra outlay of fifty cents a barrel often brings a return of a dollar a
barrel in the market. One fact often neglected by Southern growers who
raise potatoes for a Northern market is that the Northern markets demand
a potato that will cook dry and mealy, and that they will not accept the
juicy, sugary potato so popular in the South.
The storage of sweet potatoes presents difficulties owing to their great
tendency to decay under the influence of the ever-present fungi and
bacteria. This tendency can be met by preventing bruises and by keeping
the bin free from rotting potatoes. The potatoes should be cleaned, and
after the moisture has been dried off they should be stored in a dry,
warm place.
The sweet-potato vine makes a fair quality of hay and with proper
precaution may be used for ensilage. Small, defective, unsalable
potatoes are rich in sugar and starch and are therefore good stock food.
Since they contain so much water they must be used only as an aid to
other diet.
SECTION XLI. WHITE, OR IRISH, POTATOES
Maize, or Indian corn, and potatoes are the two greatest gifts in the
way of food that America has bestowed on the other nations. Since their
adoption in the sixteenth century as a new food from recently discovered
America, white potatoes have become one of the world's most important
crops.
[Illustration: FIG. 204. CULTIVATING AND RIDGING POTATOES]
No grower will harvest large crops of potatoes unless he chooses soil
that suits the plant, selects his seed carefully, cultivates thoroughly,
feeds his land sufficiently, and sprays regularly.
The soil should be free from potato scab. This disease remains in land
for several years. Hence if land is known to have any form of scab in
it, do not plant potatoes in such land. Select for this crop a deep and
moderately light, sandy loam which has an open subsoil and which is rich
in humus. The soil must be light enough for the potatoes, or tubers, to
enlarge easily and dry enough to prevent rot or blight or other
diseases. Potato soil should be so close-grained that it will hold
moisture during a dry spell and yet so well-drained that the tubers will
not be hurt by too much moisture in wet weather.
If the land selected for potatoes is lacking in humus, fine compost or
well-rotted manure will greatly increase the yield. However, it should
be remembered that green manure makes a good home for the growth of scab
germs. Hence it is safest to apply this sort of manure in the fall, or,
better still, use a heavy dressing of manure on the crop which the
potatoes are to follow. Leguminous crops supply both humus and nitrogen
and, at the same time, improve the subsoil. Therefore such crops are
excellent to go immediately before potatoes. If land is well supplied
with humus, commercial fertilizers are perhaps safer than manure, for
when these fertilizers are used the amount of plant food is more easily
regulated. Select a fertilizer that is rich in potash. For gardens
unleached wood ashes make a valuable fertilizer because they supply
potash. Early potatoes need more fertilization than do late ones. While
potatoes do best on rich land, they should not be overfed, for a too
heavy growth of foliage is likely to cause blight.
Be careful to select seed from sound potatoes which are entirely free
from scab. Get the kinds that thrive best in the section in which they
are to be planted and which suit best the markets in which they are to
be sold. Seed potatoes should be kept in a cool place so that they will
not sprout before planting-time. As a rule consumers prefer a smooth,
regularly shaped, shallow-eyed white or flesh-colored potato which is
mealy when cooked. Therefore, select seed tubers with these qualities.
It seems proved that when whole potatoes are used for seed the yield is
larger than when sliced potatoes are planted. It is of course too
costly to plant whole potatoes, but it is a good practice to cause the
plants to thrive by planting large seed pieces.
[Illustration: FIG. 205. GATHERING POTATOES]
Like other crops, potatoes need a thoroughly prepared seed-bed and
intelligent cultivation. Break the land deep. Then go over it with an
ordinary harrow until all clods are broken and the soil is fine and well
closed. The rows should be at least three feet from one another and the
seeds placed from twelve to eighteen inches apart in the row, and
covered to a depth of three or four inches. A late crop should be
planted deeper than an early one. Before the plants come up it is well
to go over the field once or twice with a harrow so as to kill all
weeds. Do not fail to save moisture by frequent cultivation. After the
plants start to grow, all cultivation should be shallow, for the roots
feed near the surface and should not be broken. Cultivate as often as
needed to keep down weeds and grass and to keep the ground fine.
Allow potatoes to dry thoroughly before they are stored, but never allow
them to remain long in the sunshine. Never dig them in damp weather, for
the moisture clinging to them will cause them to rot. After the tubers
are dry, store them in barrels or bins in a dry, cool, and dark place.
Never allow them to freeze.
Among the common diseases and insect pests that attack the leaves and
stems of potato vines are early blight, late blight, brown rot, the
flea-beetle, and the potato beetle, or potato bug. Spraying with
Bordeaux mixture to which a small portion of Paris green has been added
will control both the diseases and the pests. The spraying should begin
when the plants are five or six inches high and should not cease until
the foliage begins to die.
Scab is a disease of the tubers. It may be prevented (1) by using seed
potatoes that are free from scab; (2) by planting land in which there is
no scab; and (3) by soaking the seed in formalin (see page 135).
SECTION XLII. OATS
The oat plant belongs to the grass family. It is a hardy plant and,
under good conditions, a vigorous grower. It stands cold and wet better
than any other cereal except possibly rye. Oats like a cool, moist
climate. In warm climates, oats do best when they are sowed in the fall.
In cooler sections, spring seeding is more generally practiced.
There are a great many varieties of oats. No one variety is best adapted
to all sections, but many varieties make fine crops in many sections.
Any variety is desirable which has these qualities: power to resist
disease and insect enemies, heavy grains, thin hulls, good color, and
suitability to local surroundings.
As oats and rye make a better yield on poor land than any other cereals,
some farmers usually plant these crops on their poorest lands. However,
no land is too good to be used for so valuable a crop as oats. Oats
require a great deal of moisture; hence light, sandy soils are not so
well adapted to this crop as are the sandy loams and fine clay loams
with their closer and heavier texture.
If oats are to be planted in the spring, the ground should be broken in
the fall, winter, or early spring so that no delay may occur at
seeding-time. But to have a thoroughly settled, compact seed-bed the
breaking of the land should be done at least a month before the seeding,
and it will help greatly to run over the land with a disk harrow
immediately after the breaking.
[Illustration: FIG. 206. OATS
Common oats at left; side oats at right]
Oats may be planted by scattering them broadcast or by means of a drill.
The drill is better, because the grains are more uniformly distributed
and the depth of planting is better regulated. The seeds should be
covered from one and a half to two inches deep. In a very dry season
three inches may not be too deep. The amount of seed needed to the acre
varies considerably, but generally the seeding is from two to three
bushels an acre. On poor lands two bushels will be a fair average
seeding; on good lands as much as three bushels should be used.
[Illustration: FIG. 207. HARVESTING OATS]
This crop fits in well, over wide areas, with various rotations. As the
purpose of all rotation is to keep the soil productive, oats should
alternate every few years with one of the nitrogen-gathering crops. In
the South, cowpeas, soy beans, clovers, and vetches may be used in this
rotation. In the North and West the clovers mixed with timothy hay make
a useful combination for this purpose.
Spring-sowed oats, since they have a short growing season, need their
nitrogenous plant food in a form which can be quickly used. To supply
this nitrogen a top-dressing of nitrate of soda or sulphate of lime is
helpful. The plant can gather its food quickly from either of these
two. As fall-sowed oats have of course a longer growing season, the
nitrogen can be supplied by well-rotted manure, blood, tankage, or
fish-scrap. Use barnyard manure carefully. Do not apply too much just
before seeding, and use only thoroughly rotted manure. It is always
desirable to have a bountiful supply of humus in land on which oats are
to be planted.
The time of harvesting will vary with the use which is to be made of the
oats. If the crop is to be threshed, the harvesting should be done when
the kernels have passed out of the milk into the hard dough state. The
lower leaves of the stalks will at this time have turned yellow, and the
kernels will be plump and full. Do not, however, wait too long, for if
you do the grain will shatter and the straw lose in feeding value.
On the other hand, if the oats are to be cut for hay it is best to cut
them while the grains are still in the milk stage. At this stage the
leaves are still green and the plants are rich in protein.
Oats should be cured quickly. It is very important that threshed oats
should be dry before they are stored. Should they on being stored still
contain moisture, they will be likely to heat and to discolor. Any
discoloring will reduce their value. Nor should oats ever be allowed to
remain long in the fields, no matter how well they may seem to be
shocked. The dew and the rain will injure their value by discoloring
them more or less.
Oats are muscle-builders rather than fat-formers. Hence they are a
valuable ration for work animals, dairy cows, and breeding-stock.
SECTION XLIII. RYE
Rye has the power of gathering its food from a wider area than most
other plants. Of course, then, it is a fine crop for poor land, and
farmers often plant it only on worn land. However, it is too good a
cereal to be treated in so ungenerous a fashion. As a cover-crop for
poor land it adds much humus to the soil and makes capital grazing.
[Illustration: FIG. 208. RYE READY FOR CUTTING]
There are two types of rye--the winter and the spring. The winter type
is chiefly grown in this country. Rye seeds should be bought as near
home as possible, for this plant thrives best when the new crop grows
under the same conditions as the seed crop.
Rye will grow on almost any soil that is drained. Soils that are too
sandy for wheat will generally yield good crops of rye. Clay soils,
however, are not adapted to the plant nor to the grazing for which the
plant is generally sowed. For winter rye the land should be broken from
four to six inches. Harrows should follow the plows until the land is
well pulverized. In some cold prairie lands, however, rye is put in with
a grain-drill before a plow removes the stubble from the land. The
purpose of planting in this way is to let the stubble protect the young
plants from cold, driving winds.
Rye should go into the ground earlier than wheat. In cold, bleak
climates, as well as on poor land, the seeding should be early. The
young plant needs to get rooted and topped before cold weather sets in.
The only danger in very early planting is that leaf-rust sometimes
attacks the forward crop. Of course the earlier the rye is ready for
fall and winter pasturage, the better. If a drill is used for planting,
a seeding of from three to four pecks to the acre should give a good
stand. In case the seeds are to be sowed broadcast, a bushel or a bushel
and a half for every acre is needed. The seed should be covered as wheat
seed is and the ground rolled.
Rye is generally used as a grazing or as a soiling crop. Therefore its
value will depend largely on its vigorous growth in stems and leaves. To
get this growth, liberal amounts of nitrogenous fertilizer will have to
be applied unless the land is very rich. Put barnyard manure on the land
just after the first breaking and disk the manure into the soil. Acid
phosphate and kainite added to the manure may pay handsomely. A spring
top-dressing of nitrate of soda is usually helpful.
Rye has a stiff straw and does not fall, or "lodge," so badly as some of
the other cereals. As soon as rye that is meant for threshing is cut, it
should be put up in shocks until it is thoroughly dry. Begin the cutting
when the kernels are in a tough dough state. The grain should never
stand long in the shocks.
SECTION XLIV. BARLEY
Barley is one of the oldest crops known to man. The old historian Pliny
says that barley was the first food of mankind. Modern man however
prefers wheat and corn and potatoes to barley, and as a food this
ancient crop is in America turned over to the lower animals. Brewers use
barley extensively in making malt liquors. Barley grows in nearly all
sections of our country, but a few states--namely, Minnesota,
California, Wisconsin, Iowa, and North and South Dakota--are seeding
large areas to this crop.
For malting purposes the barley raised on rather light, friable, porous
soil is best. Soils of this kind are likely to produce a medium yield of
bright grain. Fertile loamy and clay soils make generally a heavier
yield of barley, but the grain is dark and fit only to be fed to stock.
Barley is a shallow feeder, and can reach only such plant food as is
found in the top soil, so its food should always be put within reach by
a thorough breaking, harrowing, and mellowing of the soil, and by
fertilizing if the soil is poor. Barley has been successfully raised
both by irrigation and by dry-farming methods. It requires a
better-prepared soil than the other grain crops; it makes fine yields
when it follows some crop that has received a heavy dressing of manure.
Capital yields are produced after alfalfa or after root crops. This crop
usually matures within a hundred days from its seeding.
[Illustration: FIG. 209. BARLEY]
When the crop is to be sold to the brewers, a grain rich in starch
should be secured. Barley intended for malting should be fertilized to
this end. Many experiments have shown that a fertilizer which contains
much potash will produce starchy barley. If the barley be intended for
stock, you should breed so as to get protein in the grain and in the
stalk. Hence barley which is to be fed should be fertilized with
mixtures containing nitrogen and phosphoric acid. Young barley plants
are more likely to be hurt by cold than either wheat or oats. Hence
barley ought not to be seeded until all danger from frost is over. The
seeds should be covered deeper than the seeds of wheat or of oats. Four
inches is perhaps an average depth for covering. But the covering will
vary with the time of planting, with the kind of ground, with the
climate, and with the nature of the season. Fewer seeds will be needed
if the barley is planted by means of a drill.
Like other cereals, barley should not be grown continuously on the same
land. It should take its place in a well-planned rotation. It may
profitably follow potatoes or other hoed crops, but it should not come
first after wheat, oats, or rye.
Barley should be harvested as soon as most of its kernels have reached
the hard dough state. It is more likely to shatter its grain than are
other cereals, and it should therefore be handled with care. It must
also be watched to prevent its sprouting in the shocks. Be sure to put
few bundles in the shock and to cap the shock securely enough to keep
out dew and rain. If possible the barley should be threshed directly
from the shock, as much handling will occasion a serious loss from
shattering.
SECTION XLV. SUGAR PLANTS
In the United States there are three sources from which sugar is
obtained; namely, the sugar-maple, the sugar-beet, and the sugar-cane.
In the early days of our country considerable quantities of maple sirup
and maple sugar were made. This was the first source of sugar. Then
sugar-cane began to be grown. Later the sugar-beet was introduced.
=Maple Products.= In many states sirup and sugar are still made from
maple sap. In the spring when the sap is flowing freely maple trees are
tapped and spouts are inserted. Through these spouts the sap flows into
vessels set to catch it. The sap is boiled in evaporating-pans, and made
into either sirup or sugar. Four gallons of sap yield about one pound of
sugar. A single tree yields from two to six pounds of sugar in a season.
The sap cannot be kept long after it is collected. Practice and skill
are needed to produce an attractive and palatable grade of sirup or of
sugar.
=Sugar-Beets.= The sugar-beet is a comparatively new root crop in
America. The amount of sugar that can be obtained from beets varies from
twelve to twenty per cent. The richness in sugar depends somewhat on the
variety grown and on the soil and the climate.
So far most of our sugar-beet seeds have been brought over from Europe.
Some of our planters are now, however, gaining the skill and the
knowledge needed to grow these seeds. It is of course important to grow
seeds that will produce beets containing much sugar.
[Illustration: FIG. 210. CATCHING MAPLE SAP]
These beets do well in a great variety of soils if the land is rich,
well prepared, and well drained, and has a porous subsoil.
Beets cannot grow to a large size in hard land. Hence deep plowing is
very necessary for this crop. The soil should be loose enough for the
whole body of the beet to remain underground. Some growers prefer spring
plowing and some fall plowing, but all agree that the land should not be
turned less than eight or ten inches. The subsoil, however, should not
be turned up too much at the first deep plowing.
Too much care cannot be taken to make the seed-bed firm and mellow and
to have it free from clods. If the soil is dry at planting-time and
there is likelihood of high winds, the seed-bed may be rolled with
profit. Experienced growers use from ten to twelve pounds of seeds to an
acre. It is better to use too many rather than too few seeds, for it is
easy to thin out the plants, but rather difficult to transplant them.
The seeds are usually drilled in rows about twenty inches apart. Of
course, if the soil is rather warm and moist at planting-time, fewer
seeds will be needed than when germination is likely to be slow.
[Illustration: FIG. 211. SUGAR-BEET]
A good rotation should always be planned for this beet. A very
successful one is as follows: for the first year, corn heavily
fertilized with stable manure; for the second year, sugar-beets; for the
third year, oats or barley; for the fourth year, clover; then go back
again to corn. In addition to keeping the soil fertile, there are two
gains from this rotation: first, the clean cultivation of the corn crop
just ahead of the beets destroys many of the weed seeds; second, the
beets must be protected from too much nitrogen in the soil, for an
excess of nitrogen makes a beet too large to be rich in sugar. The
manure, heavily applied to the corn, will leave enough nitrogen and
other plant food in the soil to make a good crop of beets and avoid any
danger of an excess.
When the outside leaves of the beet take on a yellow tinge and drop to
the ground, the beets are ripe. The mature beets are richer in sugar
than the immature, therefore they should not be harvested too soon. They
may remain in the ground without injury for some time after they are
ripe. Cold weather does not injure the roots unless it is accompanied by
freezing and thawing.
[Illustration: FIG. 212. SUGAR-BEETS ON THE WAY TO A FACTORY]
The beets are harvested by sugar-beet pullers or by hand. If the roots
are to be gathered by hand they are usually loosened by plowing on each
side of them. If the roots are stored they should be put in long, narrow
piles and covered with straw and earth to protect them from frost. A
ventilator placed at the top of the pile will enable the heat and
moisture to escape. If the beets get too warm they will ferment and some
of their sugar will be lost.
=Sugar-Cane.= Sugar-cane is grown along the Gulf of Mexico and the South
Atlantic coast. In Mississippi, in Alabama, Florida, Georgia, South
Carolina, northern Louisiana, and in northern Texas it is generally made
into sirup. In southern Louisiana and southern Texas the cane is usually
crushed for sugar or for molasses.
[Illustration: FIG. 213. STALK OF SUGAR-CANE
_A-B_, joints of cane showing roots; _B-C_, stem; _C-D_, leaves]
The sugar-cane is a huge grass. The stalk, which is round, is from one
to two inches in thickness.
The stalks vary in color. Some are white, some yellow, some green, some
red, some purple, and some black, while others are a mixture of two or
three of these colors. As shown in Fig. 214 the stalk has joints at
distances of from two to six inches. These joints are called nodes, and
the sections between the nodes are known as internodes. The internodes
ripen from the roots upward, and as each ripens it casts its leaves. The
stalk, when ready for harvesting, has only a few leaves on the top.
[Illustration: Fig. 214. STICK OF SUGAR-CANE
_A_, buds, or eyes; _C_, nodes; _D_, internodes; _X_, semi-transparent
dots in rows]
Under each leaf and on alternate sides of the cane a bud, or "eye,"
forms. From this eye the cane is usually propagated; for, while in
tropical countries the cane forms seeds, yet these seeds are rarely
fertile. When the cane is ripe it is stripped of leaves, topped, and cut
at the ground with a knife. The sugar is contained in solution in the
pith of the cane.
Cane requires an enormous amount of water for its best growth, and where
the rainfall is not great enough, the plants are irrigated. It requires
from seventy-five to one hundred gallons of water to make a pound of
sugar. Cane does best where there is a rainfall of two inches a week. At
the same time a well-drained soil is necessary to make vigorous canes.
The soils suited to this plant are those which contain large amounts of
fertilizing material and which can hold much water. In southern
Louisiana alluvial loams and loamy clay soils are cultivated. In
Georgia, Alabama, and Florida light, sandy soils, when properly
fertilized and worked, make good crops.
[Illustration: FIG. 215. PLANTING SUGAR-CANE]
[Illustration: FIG. 216. LOADING SUGAR-CANE]
Cane is usually planted in rows from five to six feet apart. A trench is
opened in the center of the row with a plow and in this open furrow is
placed a continuous line of stalks which are carefully covered with
plow, cultivator, or hoe. From one to three continuous lines of stalks
are placed in the furrow. From two to six tons of seed cane are needed
for an acre. In favorable weather the cane soon sprouts and cultivation
begins. Cane should be cultivated at short intervals until the plants
are large enough to shade the soil. In Louisiana one planting of cane
usually gives two crops. The first is called plant cane; the second is
known as first-year stubble, or ratoon. Sometimes second-year stubble is
grown.
[Illustration: FIG. 217. A COMMON TYPE OF SIRUP FACTORY]
In Louisiana large quantities of tankage, cotton-seed meal, and acid
phosphate are used to fertilize cane-fields. Each country has its own
time for planting and harvesting. In Louisiana, for example, canes are
planted from October to April. In the United States cane is harvested
each year because of frost, but in tropical countries the stalks are
permitted to grow from fifteen to twenty-four months.
On many farms a small mill, the rollers of which are turned by horses,
is used for crushing the juice out of the cane. The juice is then
evaporated in a kettle or pan. This equipment is very cheap and can
easily be operated by a small family. While these mills rarely extract
more than one half of the juice in the cane, the sirup made by them is
very palatable and usually commands a good price. Costly machinery which
saves most of the juice is used in the large commercial sugar houses.
SECTION XLVI. HEMP AND FLAX
In the early ages of the world, mankind is supposed to have worn very
little or no clothing. Then leaves and the inner bark of trees were
fashioned into a protection from the weather. These flimsy garments were
later replaced by skins and furs. As man advanced in knowledge, he
learned how to twist wool and hairs into threads and to weave these into
durable garments. Still later, perhaps, he discovered that some plants
conceal under their outer bark soft, tough fibers that can be changed
into excellent cloth. Flax and hemp were doubtless among the first
plants to furnish this fiber.
=Flax.= Among the fiber crops of the world, flax ranks next to cotton.
It is the material from which is woven the linen for sheets, towels,
tablecloths, shirts, collars, dresses, and a host of other articles.
Fortunately for man, flax will thrive in many countries and in many
climates. The fiber from which these useful articles are made, unlike
cotton fiber, does not come from the fruit, but from the stem. It is the
soft, silky lining of the bark which lies between the woody outside and
the pith cells of the stem.
The Old World engages largely in flax culture and flax manufacture, but
in our country flax is grown principally for its seed. From the seeds we
make linseed oil, linseed-oil cake, and linseed meal.
Flax grows best on deep, loamy soils, but also makes a profitable growth
on clay soils. With sufficient fertilizing material it can be grown on
sandy lands. Nitrogen is especially needed by this plant and should be
liberally supplied. To meet this demand for nitrogen, it pays to plant a
leguminous crop immediately before flax.
[Illustration: FIG. 218. FLAX]
After a mellow seed-bed has been made ready and after the weather is
fairly warm, sow, if a seed crop is desired, at the rate of from two to
three pecks an acre. A good seed crop will not be harvested if the
plants are too thick. On the other hand, if a fiber crop is to be
raised, it is desirable to plant more thickly, so that the stalks may
not branch, but run up into a single stem. From a bushel to two bushels
of seed is in this case used to an acre. Flax requires care and work
from start to finish.
When the seeds are full and plump the flax is ready for harvesting. In
America a binder is generally used for cutting the stalks. Our average
yield of flax is from eight to fifteen bushels an acre.
=Hemp.= Like flax, hemp adapts itself wonderfully to many countries and
many climates. However, in America most of our hemp is grown in
Kentucky.
[Illustration: FIG. 219. CUTTING HEMP]
Hemp needs soil rich enough to give the young plants a very rapid growth
in their early days so that they may form long fibers. To give this crop
abundant nitrogen without great cost, it should be grown in a rotation
which includes one of the legumes. Rich, well-drained bottom-lands
produce the largest yields of hemp, but uplands which have been heavily
manured make profitable yields.
The ground for hemp is prepared as for other grain crops. The seed is
generally broadcasted for a fiber crop and then harrowed in. No
cultivation is required after seeding.
If hemp is grown for seed, it is best to plant with a drill so that the
crop may be cultivated. The stalks after being cut are put in shocks
until they are dry. Then the seeds are threshed. Large amounts of hemp
seed are sold for caged birds and for poultry; it is also used for
paint-oils.
SECTION XLVII. BUCKWHEAT
Buckwheat shares with rye and cowpeas the power to make a fairly good
crop on poor land. At the same time, of course, a full crop can be
expected only from fertile land.
The three varieties most grown in America are the common gray, the
silver-hull, and the Japanese. The seeds of the common gray are larger
than the silver-hull, but not so large as the Japanese. The seeds from
the gray variety are generally regarded as inferior to the other two.
This crop is grown to best advantage in climates where the nights are
cool and moist. It matures more quickly than any other grain crop and is
remarkably free from disease. The yield varies from ten to forty bushels
an acre. Buckwheat does not seem to draw plant food heavily from the
soil and can be grown on the same land from year to year.
In fertilizing buckwheat land, green manures and rich nitrogenous
fertilizers should be avoided. These cause such a luxuriant growth that
the stalks lodge badly.
The time of seeding will have to be settled by the height of the land
and by the climate. In northern climates and in high altitudes the
seeding is generally done in May or June. In southern climates and in
low altitudes the planting may wait until July or August. The plant
usually matures in about seventy days. It cannot stand warm weather at
blooming-time, and must always be planted so that it may escape warm
weather in its blooming period and cold weather in its maturing season.
The seeds are commonly broadcasted at an average rate of four pecks to
the acre. If the land is loose and pulverized, it should be rolled.
[Illustration: FIG. 220. BUCKWHEAT IN SHOCK]
Buckwheat ripens unevenly and will continue to bloom until frost.
Harvesting usually begins just after the first crop of seeds have
matured. To keep the grains from shattering, the harvesting is best done
during damp or cloudy days or early in the morning while the dew is
still on the grain. The grain should be threshed as soon as it is dry
enough to go through the thresher.
Buckwheat is grown largely for table use. The grain is crushed into a
dark flour that makes most palatable breakfast cakes. The grain,
especially when mixed with corn, is becoming popular for poultry food.
The middlings, which are rich in fats and protein, are prized for dairy
cows.
SECTION XLVIII. RICE
The United States produces only about one half of the rice that it
consumes. There is no satisfactory reason for our not raising more of
this staple crop, for five great states along the Gulf of Mexico are
well adapted to its culture.
[Illustration: FIG. 221. THRESHING RICE]
There are two distinct kinds of rice, upland rice and lowland rice.
Upland rice demands in general the same methods of culture that are
required by other cereals, for example, oats or wheat. The growing of
lowland rice is considerably more difficult and includes the necessity
of flooding the fields with water at proper times.
A stiff, half-clay soil with some loam is best suited to this crop. The
soil should have a clay subsoil to retain water and to give stiffness
enough to allow the use of harvesting-machinery. Some good rice soils
are so stiff that they must be flooded to soften them enough to admit of
plowing. Plow deeply to give the roots ample feeding-space. Good
tillage, which is too often neglected, is valuable.
Careful seed-selection is perhaps even more needed for rice than for any
other crop. Consumers want kernels of the same size. Be sure that your
seed is free from red rice and other weeds. Drilling is much better
than broadcasting, as it secures a more even distribution of the seed.
The notion generally prevails that flooding returns to the soil the
needed fertility. This may be true if the flooding-water deposits much
silt, but if the water be clear it is untrue, and fertilizers or
leguminous crops are needed to keep up fertility. Cowpeas replace the
lost soil-elements and keep down weeds, grasses, and red rice.
Red rice is a weed close kin to rice, but the seed of one will not
produce the other. Do not allow it to get mixed and sowed with your rice
seed or to go to seed in your field.
SECTION XLIX. THE TIMBER CROP
Forest trees are not usually regarded as a crop, but they are certainly
one of the most important crops. We should accustom ourselves to look on
our trees as needing and as deserving the same care and thought that we
give to our other field crops. The total number of acres given to the
growth of forest trees is still enormous, but we should each year add to
this acreage.
Unfortunately very few forests are so managed as to add yearly to their
value and to preserve a model stand of trees. Axmen generally fell the
great trees without thought of the young trees that should at once begin
to fill the places left vacant by the fallen giants. Owners rarely study
their woodlands to be sure that the trees are thick enough, or to find
out whether the saplings are ruinously crowding one another. Disease is
often allowed to slip in unchecked. Old trees stand long after they have
outlived their usefulness.
The farm wood-lot, too, is often neglected. As forests are being swept
away, fuel is of course becoming scarcer and more costly. Every farmer
ought to plant trees enough on his waste land to make sure of a constant
supply of fuel. The land saved for the wood-lot should be selected from
land unfit for cultivation. Steep hillsides, rocky slopes, ravines,
banks of streams--these can, without much expense or labor, be set in
trees and insure a never-ending fuel supply.
[Illustration: FIG. 222. WOOD LOT
Before proper treatment]
The most common enemies of the forest crop are:
First, forest fires. The waste from forest fires in the United States is
most startling. Many of these fires are the result of carelessness or
ignorance. Most of the states have made or are now making laws to
prevent and to control such fires.
Second, fungous diseases. The timber loss from these diseases is
exceedingly great.
Third, insects of many kinds prey on the trees. Some strip all the
leaves from the branches. Others bore into the roots, trunk, or
branches. Some lead to a slow death; others are more quickly fatal.
Fourth, improper grazing. Turning animals into young woods may lead to
serious loss. The animals frequently ruin young trees by eating all the
foliage. Hogs often unearth and consume most of the seeds needed for a
good growth.
[Illustration: FIG. 223. WOOD LOT
After proper treatment]
The handling of forests is a business just as the growing of corn is a
business. In old forests, dead and dying trees should be cut. Trees that
occupy space and yet have little commercial value should give way to
more valuable trees. A quick-growing tree, if it is equally desirable,
should be preferred to a slow grower. An even distribution of the trees
should be secured.
In all there are about five hundred species of trees which are natives
of the United States. Probably not over seventy of these are desirable
for forests. In selecting trees to plant or to allow to grow from their
own seeding, pick those that make a quick growth, that have a steady
market value, and that suit the soil, the place of growth, and the
climate.
SECTION L. THE FARM GARDEN
Every farmer needs a garden in which to grow not only vegetables but
small fruits for the home table.
The garden should always be within convenient distance of the farmhouse.
If possible, the spot selected should have a soil of mixed loam and
clay. Every foot of soil in the garden should be made rich and mellow by
manure and cultivation. The worst soils for the home garden are light,
sandy soils, or stiff, clayey soils; but any soil, by judicious and
intelligent culture, can be made suitable.
In laying out the garden we should bear in mind that hand labor is the
most expensive kind of labor. Hence we should not, as is commonly done,
lay off the garden spot in the form of a square, but we should mark off
for our purpose a long, narrow piece of land, so that the cultivating
tools may all be conveniently drawn by a horse or a mule. The use of the
plow and the horse cultivator enables the cultivation of the garden to
be done quickly, easily, and cheaply.
Each vegetable or fruit should be planted in rows, and not in little
patches. Beginning with one side of the garden the following plan of
arrangement is simple and complete: two rows to corn for table use; two
to cabbages, beets, radishes, and eggplants; two to onions, peas, and
beans; two to oyster-plants, okra, parsley, and turnips; two to
tomatoes; then four on the other side can be used for strawberries,
blackberries, raspberries, currants, and gooseberries.
[Illustration: FIG. 224. WHERE DELICIOUS GARDEN VEGETABLES GROW]
The garden, when so arranged, can be tilled in the spring and tended
throughout the growing season with little labor and little loss of time.
In return for this odd-hour work, the farmer's family will have
throughout the year an abundance of fresh, palatable, and health-giving
vegetables and small fruits.
The keynote of successful gardening is to stir the soil. Stir it often
with four objects in view:
1. To destroy weeds.
2. To let air enter the soil.
3. To enrich the soil by the action of the air.
4. To retain the moisture by preventing its evaporation.
corn
corn
cabbage beets radishes
cabbage beets eggplants
onions peas beans
onions peas beans
oyster-plants okra parsley parsnips
tomatoes
tomatoes
strawberries currants raspberries blackberries
[Illustration: FIG. 225. HOW TO LAY OUT THE GARDEN[1]]
This illustration shows that practically every garden vegetable and all
the small fruits can be included in the farm garden, and all the work be
done by horse-drawn tools.
[Footnote 1: The number of rows and arrangement of the vegetables in the
outline above are merely suggestive. They should be changed to meet the
needs and the tastes of each particular family.]
CHAPTER IX
FEED STUFFS
SECTION LI. GRASSES
Under usual conditions no farmer expects to grow live stock successfully
and economically without setting apart a large part of his land for the
growth of mowing and pasture crops. Therefore to the grower of stock the
management of grass crops is all-important.
In planting either for a meadow or for a pasture, the farmer should mix
different varieties of grass seeds. Nature mixes them when she plants,
and Nature is always a trustworthy teacher.
In planting for a pasture the aim should be to sow such seeds as will
give green grass from early spring to latest fall. In seeding for a
meadow such varieties should be sowed together as ripen about the same
time.
Even in those sections of the country where it grows sparingly and where
it is easily crowded out, clover should be mixed with all grasses sowed,
for it leaves in the soil a wealth of plant food for the grasses coming
after it to feed on. Nearly every part of our country has some clover
that experience shows to be exactly suited to its soil and climate.
Study these clovers carefully and mix them with your grass seed.
The reason for mixing clover and grass is at once seen. The true
grasses, so far as science now shows, get all their nitrogen from the
soil; hence they more or less exhaust the soil. But, as several times
explained in this book, the clovers are legumes, and all legumes are
able by means of the bacteria that live on their roots to use the free
nitrogen of the air. Hence without cost to the farmer these clovers help
the soil to feed their neighbors, the true grasses. For this reason some
light perennial legume should always be added to grass seed.
[Illustration: FIG. 226. SINGLE PLANT OF GIANT MILLET]
It is not possible for grasses to do well in a soil that is full of
weeds. For this reason it is always best to sow grass in fields from
which cultivated crops have just been taken. Soil which is to have grass
sowed in it should have its particles pressed together. The small grass
seeds cannot take root and grow well in land that has just been plowed
and which, consequently, has its particles loose and comparatively far
apart. On the other hand, land from which a crop of corn or cotton has
just been harvested is in a compact condition. The soil particles are
pressed well together. Such land when mellowed by harrowing makes a
splendid bed for grass seeds. A firm soil draws moisture up to the
seeds, while a mellow soil acts as a blanket to keep moisture from
wasting into the air, and at the same time allows the heated air to
circulate in the soil.
In case land has to be plowed for grass-seeding, the plowing should be
done as far as possible in advance of the seeding. Then the plowed land
should be harrowed several times to get the land in a soft, mellow
condition.
If the seed-bed be carefully prepared, little work on the ground is
necessary after the seeds are sowed. One light harrowing is sufficient
to cover the broadcast seeds. This harrowing should always be done as
soon as the seeds are scattered, for if there be moisture in the soil
the tiny seeds will soon sprout, and if the harrowing be done after
germination is somewhat advanced, the tender grass plants will be
injured.
There are many kinds of pasture and meadow grasses. In New England,
timothy, red clover, and redtop are generally used for the mowing crop.
For permanent pasture, in addition to those mentioned, there should be
added white clover and either Kentucky or Canadian blue grass. In the
Southern states a good meadow or pasture can be made of orchard grass,
red clover, and redtop. For a permanent pasture in the South, Japan
clover, Bermuda, and such other local grasses as have been found to
adapt themselves readily to the climate should be added. In the Middle
States temporary meadows and pastures are generally made of timothy and
red clover, while for permanent pastures white clover and blue grass
thrive well. In the more western states the grasses previously suggested
are readily at home. Alfalfa is proving its adaptability to nearly all
sections and climates, and is in many respects the most promising grass
crop of America.
[Illustration: FIG. 227. BERMUDA]
It hardly ever pays to pasture meadows, except slightly, the first
season, and then only when the soil is dry. It is also poor policy to
pasture any kind of grass land early in the spring when the soil is wet,
because the tramping of animals crushes and destroys the crowns of the
plants. After the first year the sward becomes thicker and tougher, and
the grass is not at all injured if it is grazed wisely.
[Illustration: FIG. 228. ALFALFA THE WONDERFUL
The first crop of the season is being cut and stored for winter]
The state of maturity at which grass should be harvested to make hay of
the best quality varies somewhat with the different grasses and with the
use which is to be made of the hay. Generally speaking, it is a good
rule to cut grass for hay just as it is beginning to bloom or just after
the bloom has fallen. All grasses become less palatable to stock as they
mature and form seed. If grass be allowed to go to seed, most of the
nutrition in the stalk is used to form the seed.
[Illustration: FIG. 229. HARVESTING ALFALFA]
Hence a good deal of food is lost by waiting to cut hay until the seeds
are formed.
Pasture lands and meadow lands are often greatly improved by replowing
and harrowing in order to break up the turf that forms and to admit air
more freely into the soil. The plant-roots that are destroyed by the
plowing or harrowing make quickly available plant food by their decay,
and the physical improvement of the soil leads to a thicker and better
stand. In the older sections of the country commercial fertilizer can be
used to advantage in producing hay and pasturage. If, however, clover
has just been grown on grass land or if it is growing well with the
grass, there is no need to add nitrogen. If the grass seems to lack
sufficient nourishment, add phosphoric acid and potash. However, grass
not grown in company with clover often needs dried blood, nitrate of
soda, or some other nitrogen-supplying agent. Of course it is understood
that no better fertilizer can be applied to grass than barnyard manure.
SECTION LII. LEGUMES
Often land which was once thought excellent is left to grow up in weeds.
The owner says that the land is worn out, and that it will not pay to
plant it. What does "worn out" mean? Simply that constant cropping has
used up the plant food in the land. Therefore, plants on worn-out land
are too nearly starved to yield bountifully. Such wearing out is so
easily prevented that no owner ought ever to allow his land to become
poverty-stricken. But in case this misfortune has happened, how can the
land be again made fertile?
On page 24 you learned that phosphoric acid, potash, and nitrogen are
the foods most needed by plants. "Worn out," then, to put it in
another way, usually means that a soil has been robbed of one of these
plant necessities, or of two or of all three. To make the land once more
fruitful it is necessary to restore the missing food or foods. How can
this be done? Two of these plant foods, namely, phosphoric acid and
potash, are minerals. If either of these is lacking, it can be supplied
only by putting on the land some fertilizer containing the missing food.
Fortunately, however, nitrogen, the most costly of the plant foods, can
be readily and cheaply returned to poor land.
[Illustration: FIG. 230. ALFALFA READY FOR THE THIRD CUTTING]
As explained on page 32 the leguminous crops have the power of drawing
nitrogen from the air and, by means of their root-tubercles, of storing
it in the soil. Hence by growing these crops on poor land the expensive
nitrogen is quickly restored to the soil, and only the two cheaper plant
foods need be bought. How important it is then to grow these leguminous
plants! Every farmer should so rotate his planting that at least once
every two or three years a crop of legumes may add to the fruitfulness
of his fields.
Moreover these crops help land in another way. They send a multitude of
roots deep into the ground. These roots loosen and pulverize the soil,
and their decay, at the end of the growing season, leaves much humus in
the soil. Land will rarely become worn out if legumes are regularly and
wisely grown.
From the fact that they do well in so many different sections and in so
many different climates, the following are the most useful legumes:
alfalfa, clovers, cowpeas, vetches, and soy beans.
=Alfalfa.= Alfalfa is primarily a hay crop. It thrives in the Far West,
in the Middle West, in the North, and in the South. In fact, it will do
well wherever the soil is rich, moist, deep, and underlaid by an open
subsoil. The vast areas given to this valuable crop are yearly
increasing in every section of the United States. Alfalfa, however,
unlike the cowpea, does not take to poor land. For its cultivation,
therefore, good fertile land that is moist but not water-soaked should
be selected.
Good farmers are partial to alfalfa for three reasons. First, it yields
a heavy crop of forage or hay. Second, being a legume, it improves the
soil. Third, one seeding lasts a long time. This length of life may,
however, be destroyed by pasturing or abusing the alfalfa.
[Illustration: FIG. 231. SHEEP FATTENING ON ALFALFA STUBBLE]
Alfalfa is different from most plants in this respect: the soil in which
it grows must have certain kinds of bacteria in it. These cause the
growth of tubercles on the roots. These bacteria, however, are not
always present in land that has not been planted in alfalfa. Hence if
this plant is to be grown successfully these helpful bacteria must
sometimes be supplied artificially.
There are two very easy ways of supplying the germs. First, fine soil
from an alfalfa field may be scattered broadcast over the fields to be
seeded. Second, a small mass of alfalfa tubercle germs may be put into a
liquid containing proper food to make these germs multiply and grow;
then the seeds to be planted are soaked in this liquid in order that
the germs may fasten on the seeds.
Before the seeds are sowed the soil should be mellowed. Over this
well-prepared land about twenty pounds of seed to the acre should be
scattered. The seed may be scattered by hand or by a seed-sower. Cover
with a light harrow. The time of planting varies somewhat with the
climate. Except where the winters are too severe the seed may be sowed
either in the spring or in the fall. In the South sow only in the fall.
[Illustration: FIG. 232. HERD OF DAIRY CATTLE GRAZING ON ALFALFA STUBBLE]
During the first season one mowing, perhaps more, is necessary to insure
a good stand and also to keep down the weeds. When the first blossoms
appear in the early summer, it is time to start the mower. After this
the alfalfa should be cut every two, three, or four weeks. The number of
times depends on the rapidity of growth.
This crop rarely makes a good yield the first year, but if a good stand
be secured, the yield steadily increases. After a good stand has been
secured, a top-dressing of either commercial fertilizer or stable manure
will be very helpful. An occasional cutting-up of the sod with a disk
harrow does much good.
=Clovers.= The different kinds of clovers will sometimes grow on hard or
poor soil, but they do far better if the soil is enriched and properly
prepared before the seed is sowed. In many parts of our country it has
been the practice for generations to sow clover seed with some of the
grain crops. Barley, wheat, oats, and rye are the crops with which
clover is usually planted, but many good farmers now prefer to sow the
seed only with other grass seed. Circumstances must largely determine
the manner of seeding.
Crimson clover, which is a winter legume, usually does best when seeded
alone, although rye or some other grain often seems helpful to it. This
kind of clover is an excellent crop with which to follow cotton or corn.
It is most conveniently sowed at the last cultivation of these crops.
Common red clover, which is the standard clover over most of the
country, is usually seeded with timothy or with orchard grass or with
some other of the grasses. In sowing both crimson and red clover, about
ten to fifteen pounds of seed for each acre are generally used.
To make good pastures, white and Japan clover are favorites. White
clover does well in most parts of America, and Japan clover is
especially valuable in warm Southern climates. Both will do well even
when the soil is partly shaded, but they do best in land fully open to
the sun.
Careful attention is required to cure clover hay well. The clover should
always be cut before it forms seed. The best time to cut is when the
plants are in full bloom.
[Illustration: FIG. 233. CRIMSON CLOVER]
Let the mower be started in the morning. Then a few hours later run over
the field with the tedder. This will loosen the hay and let in air and
sunshine. If the weather be fair let the hay lie until the next day, and
then rake it into rows for further drying. After being raked, the hay
may either be left in the rows for final curing or it may be put in
cocks. If the weather be unsettled, it is best to cock the hay. Many
farmers have cloth covers to protect the cocks and these often aid
greatly in saving the hay crop in a rainy season. In case the hay is put
in cocks, it should be opened for a final drying before it is housed.
=Cowpeas.= The cowpea is an excellent soil-enricher. It supplies more
fertilizing material to turn into the soil, in a short time and at small
cost, than any other crop. Moreover, by good tillage and by the use of a
very small amount of fertilizer, the cowpea can be grown on land too
poor to produce any other crop. Its roots go deep into the soil. Hence
they gather plant food and moisture that shallow-rooted plants fail to
reach. These qualities make it an invaluable help in bringing worn-out
lands back to fertility.
The cowpea is a warm-weather legume. In the United States it succeeds
best in the south and southwest. It has, however, in recent years been
grown as far north as Massachusetts, New York, Ohio, Michigan, and
Minnesota, but in these cold climates other legumes are more useful.
Cowpeas should never be planted until all danger of frost is past. Some
varieties make their full growth in two months; others need four months.
There are about two hundred varieties of cowpeas. These varieties differ
in form, in the size of seed and of pod, in the color of seed and of
pod, and in the time of ripening. They differ, too, in the manner of
growth. Some grow erect; others sprawl on the ground. In selecting
varieties it is well to choose those that grow straight up, those that
are hardy, those that fruit early and abundantly, and those that hold
their leaves. The variety selected for seed should also suit the land
and the climate.
The cowpea will grow in almost any soil. It thrives best and yields most
bountifully on well-drained sandy loams. The plant also does well on
clay soils. On light, sandy soils a fairly good crop may be made, but on
such soils, wilt and root-knot are dangerous foes. A warm, moist,
well-pulverized seed-bed should always be provided. Few plants equal the
cowpea in repaying careful preparation.
[Illustration: FIG. 234. COWPEAS]
If this crop is grown for hay, the method of seeding and cultivating
will differ somewhat from the method used when a seed crop is desired.
When cowpeas are planted for hay the seeds should be drilled or
broadcasted. If the seeds are small and the land somewhat rich, about
four pecks should be sowed on each acre. If the seeds are comparatively
large and the soil not so fertile, about six pecks should be sowed to
the acre. It is safer to disk in the seeds when they are sowed broadcast
than it is to rely on a harrow to cover them. In sowing merely for a
hay crop, it is a good practice to mix sorghum, corn, soy beans, or
millet with the cowpeas. The mixed hay is more easily harvested and more
easily cured than unmixed cowpea hay. Shortly after seeding, it pays to
run over the land lightly with a harrow or a weeder in order to break
any crust that may form.
Mowing should begin as soon as the stalks and the pods have finished
growing and some of the lower leaves have begun to turn yellow. An
ordinary mower is perhaps the best machine for cutting the vines. If
possible, select only a bright day for mowing and do not start the
machine until the dew on the vines is dried. Allow the vines to remain
as they fell from the mower till they are wilted; then rake them into
windrows. The vines should generally stay in the windrows for two or
three days and be turned on the last day. They should then be put in
small, airy piles or piled around a stake that has crosspieces nailed to
it. The drying vines should never be packed; air must circulate freely
if good hay is to be made. As piling the vines around stakes is somewhat
laborious, some growers watch the curing carefully and succeed in
getting the vines dry enough to haul directly from the windrows to the
barns. Never allow the vines to stay exposed to too much sunshine when
they are first cut. If the sun strikes them too strongly, the leaves
will become brittle and shatter when they are moved.
When cowpeas are grown for their pods to ripen, the seeds should be
planted in rows about a yard apart. From two to three pecks of seeds to
an acre should be sufficient. The growing plants should be cultivated
two or three times with a good cultivator. Cowpeas were formerly
gathered by hand, but such a method is of course slow and expensive.
Pickers are now commonly used.
Some farmers use the cowpea crop only as a soil-enricher. Hence they
neither gather the seeds nor cut the hay, but plow the whole crop into
the soil. There is an average of about forty-seven pounds of nitrogen in
each ton of cowpea vines. Most of this valuable nitrogen is drawn by the
plants from the air. This amount of nitrogen is equal to that contained
in 9500 pounds of stable manure. In addition each ton of cowpea vines
contains ten pounds of phosphoric acid and twenty-nine pounds of potash.
There is danger in plowing into the soil at one time any bountiful green
crop like cowpeas. As already explained on page 10, a process
called capillarity enables moisture to rise in the soil as plants need
it. Now if a heavy cowpea crop or any other similar crop be at one
plowing turned into the soil, the soil particles will be so separated as
to destroy capillarity. Too much vegetation turned under at once may
also, if the weather be warm, cause fermentation to set in and "sour the
land." Both of these troubles may be avoided by cutting up the vines
with a disk harrow or other implement before covering them.
The custom of planting cowpeas between the rows at the last working of
corn is a good one, and wherever the climate permits this custom should
be followed.
=Vetches.= The vetches have been rapidly growing in favor for some
years. Stock eat vetch hay greedily, and this hay increases the flow of
milk in dairy animals and helps to keep animals fat and sleek. Only two
species of vetch are widely grown. These are the tare, or spring vetch,
and the winter, or hairy, vetch. Spring vetch is grown in comparatively
few sections of our country. It is, however, grown widely in England and
northern continental Europe. What we say here will be confined to hairy
vetch.
After a soil has been supplied with the germs needed by this plant, the
hairy vetch is productive on many different kinds of soil. The plant is
most vigorous on fertile loams. By good tillage and proper fertilization
it may be forced to grow rather bountifully on poor sandy and clay
loams. Acid or wet soils are not suited to vetch. Lands that are too
poor to produce clovers will frequently yield fair crops of vetch. If
this is borne in mind, many poor soils may be wonderfully improved by
growing on them this valuable legume.
[Illustration: FIG. 235. VETCH]
Vetch needs a fine well-compacted seed-bed, but it is often sowed with
good results on stubble lands and between cotton and corn rows, where it
is covered by a cultivator or a weeder.
The seeds of the vetch are costly and are brought chiefly from Germany,
where this crop is much prized. The pods ripen so irregularly that they
have to be picked by hand.
In northern climates early spring sowing is found most satisfactory. In
southern climates the seeding is best done in the late summer or early
fall. As the vetch vines have a tendency to trail on the ground, it is
wisest to plant with the vetch some crop like oats, barley, rye, or
wheat. These plants will support the vetch and keep its vines from being
injured by falling on the ground. Do not use rye with vetch in the
South. It ripens too early to be of much assistance. If sowed with oats
the seeding should be at the rate of about twenty or thirty pounds of
vetch and about one and a half or two bushels of oats to the acre. Vetch
is covered in the same way as wheat and rye.
Few crops enrich soil more rapidly than vetch if the whole plant is
turned in. It of course adds nitrogen to the soil and at the same time
supplies the soil with a large amount of organic matter to decay and
change to humus. As the crop grows during the winter, it makes an
excellent cover to prevent washing. Many orchard-growers of the
Northwest find vetch the best winter crop for the orchards as well as
for the fields.
=Soy, or Soja, Bean.= In China and Japan the soy bean is grown largely
as food for man. In the United States it is used as a forage plant and
as a soil-improver. It bids fair to become one of the most popular of
the legumes. Like the cowpea, this bean is at home only in a warm
climate. Some of the early-ripening varieties have, however, been
planted with fair success in cold climates.
While there are a large number of varieties of the soy bean, only about
a dozen are commonly grown. They differ mainly in the color, size, and
shape of the seeds, and in the time needed for ripening. Some of the
varieties are more hairy than others.
Soy beans may take many places in good crop-rotations, but they are
unusually valuable in short rotations with small grains. The grains can
be cut in time for the beans to follow them, and in turn the beans can
be harvested in the early fall and make way for another grain crop.
It should always be remembered that soy beans will not thrive unless the
land on which they are to grow is already supplied, or is supplied at
the time of sowing, with bean bacteria.
[Illustration: FIG. 236. CHINESE SOY BEANS]
The plant will grow on many different kinds of soil, but it needs a
richer soil than the cowpea does. As the crop can gather most of its own
nitrogen, it generally requires only the addition of phosphoric acid and
potash for its growth on poor land. When the first crop is seeded, apply
to each acre four hundred pounds of a fertilizing mixture which contains
about ten per cent of phosphoric acid, four per cent of potash, and from
one to two per cent of nitrogen.
If the crop is planted for hay or for grazing, mellow the ground well,
and then broadcast or drill in closely about one and a half bushels of
seed to each acre. Cover from one to two inches deep, but never allow a
crust to form over the seed, for the plant cannot break through a crust
well. When the beans are planted for seeds, a half bushel of seed to the
acre is usually sufficient. The plants should stand in the rows from
four to six inches apart, and the rows should be from thirty to forty
inches from one another. Never plant until the sun has thoroughly warmed
the land. The bean may be sowed, however, earlier than cowpeas. A most
convenient time is just after corn is planted. The rows should be
cultivated often enough to keep out weeds and grass and to keep a good
dust mulch, but the cultivation must be shallow.
[Illustration: FIG. 237. SOY BEANS]
As soy beans are grown for hay and also for seed, the harvesting will,
as with the other legumes, be controlled by the purpose for which the
crop was planted. In harvesting for a hay crop it is desirable to cut
the beans after the pods are well formed but before they are fully
grown. If the cutting is delayed until the pods are ripe, the fruit will
shatter badly. There is a loss, too, in the food value of the stems if
the cutting is late. The ordinary mowing-machine with a rake attached is
generally the machine used for cutting the stalks. The leaves should be
most carefully preserved, for they contain much nourishment for stock.
[Illustration: FIG. 238. SOY BEANS IN CORN]
Whenever the beans are grown for seeds, harvesting should begin when
three fourths of the leaves have fallen and most of the pods are ripe.
Do not wait, however, until the pods are so dry that they have begun to
split and drop their seeds. A slight amount of dampness on the plants
aids the cutting. The threshing may be done with a flail, with
pea-hullers, or with a grain-threshing machine.
The beans produce more seed to the acre than cowpeas do. Forty bushels
is a high yield. The average yield is between twenty and thirty bushels.
DESCRIPTIVE TABLE
ADAPTATION AS
Crop FOOD FOR ANIMALS LIFE REMARKS
Alfalfa Hay Perennial All animals like it; hogs
eat it even when it is dry.
Red clover Hay and pasture Perennial Best of the clovers for hay.
Alsike clover Hay and pasture Perennial Seeds itself for twenty
years. This clover is a
great favorite with bees.
Mammoth clover Hay and pasture Perennial Best for green manure.
White clover Pasture Perennial Excellent for lawns and
bees.
Japan clover Pasture Perennial Excellent for forest and
old soils.
Cowpea Hay and grain Annual Used for hay, green
manure, and pastures.
Soy bean Hay and grain Annual Often put in silo with corn.
Vetches Hay and soiling Annual Pasture for sheep and
swine. With cereals
it makes excellent hay
and soiling-food.
CHAPTER X
DOMESTIC ANIMALS
The progress that a nation is making can with reasonable accuracy be
measured by the kind of live stock it raises. The general rule is, poor
stock, poor people. All the prosperous nations of the globe, especially
the grain-growing nations, get a large share of their wealth from
raising improved stock. The stock bred by these nations is now, however,
very different from the stock raised by the same nations years ago. As
soon as man began to progress in the art of agriculture he became
dissatisfied with inferior stock. He therefore bent his energies to
raise the standard of excellence in domestic animals.
By slow stages of animal improvement the ugly, thin-flanked wild boar of
early times has been transformed into the sleek Berkshire or the
well-rounded Poland-China. In the same manner the wild sheep of the Old
World have been developed into wool and mutton breeds of the finest
excellence. By constant care, attention, and selection the thin,
long-legged wild ox has been bred into the bounteous milk-producing
Jerseys and Holsteins or into the Shorthorn mountains of flesh. From the
small, bony, coarse, and shaggy horse of ancient times have descended
the heavy Norman, or Percheron, draft horse and the fleet Arab courser.
The matter of meat-production is one of vital importance to the human
race, for animal food must always supply a large part of man's ration.
Live stock of various kinds consume the coarser foods, like the grasses,
hays, and grains, which man cannot use. As a result of this consumption
they store in their bodies the exact substances required for building up
the tissues of man's body.
When the animal is used by man for food, one class of foods stored away
in the animal's body produces muscle; another produces fat, heat, and
energy. The food furnished by the slaughter of animals seems necessary
to the full development of man. It is true that the flesh of an animal
will not support human life so long as would the grain that the animal
ate while growing, but it is also true that animal food does not require
so much of man's force to digest it. Hence the use of meat forces a part
of man's life-struggle on the lower animal.
When men feed grain to stock, the animals receive in return power and
food in their most available forms. Men strengthen the animal that they
themselves may be strengthened. One of the great questions, then, for
the stock-grower's consideration is how to make the least amount of food
fed to animals produce the most power and flesh.
SECTION LIII. HORSES
While we have a great many kinds of horses in America, horses are not
natives of this country. Just where wild horses were first tamed and
used is not certainly known. It is believed that in early ages the horse
was a much smaller animal than it now is, and that it gradually attained
its present size. Where food was abundant and nutritious and the climate
mild and healthful, the early horses developed large frames and heavy
limbs and muscles; on the other hand, where food was scarce and the
climate cold and bleak, the animals remained as dwarfed as the ponies of
the Shetland Islands.
[Illustration: FIG. 239. THE FAMILY PET]
One of the first records concerning the horse is found in Genesis xlix,
17, where Jacob speaks of "an adder that biteth the horse heels."
Pharaoh took "six hundred chosen chariots" and "with all the horses and
chariots" pursued the Israelites. The Greeks at first drove the horse
fastened to a rude chariot; later they rode on its back, learning to
manage the animal with voice or switch and without either saddle or
bridle. This thinking people soon invented the snaffle bit, and both
rode and drove with its aid. The curb bit was a Roman invention. Shoeing
was not practiced by either Greeks or Romans. Saddles and harnesses were
at first made of skins and sometimes of cloth.
Among the Tartars of middle and northern Asia and also among some other
nations, mare's milk and the flesh of the horse are used for food. Old
and otherwise worthless horses are regularly fattened for the meat
markets of France and Germany. Various uses are made of the different
parts of a horse's body. The mane and tail are used in the manufacture
of mattresses, and also furnish a haircloth for upholstering; the skin
is tanned into leather; the hoofs are used for glue, and the bones for
making fertilizer.
[Illustration: FIG. 240. PERCHERON HORSE (A DRAFT TYPE)]
Climate, food, and natural surroundings have all aided in producing
changes in the horse's form, size, and appearance. The varying
circumstances under which horses have been raised have given rise to the
different breeds. In addition, the masters' needs had much to do in
developing the type of horses wanted. Some masters desired work horses,
and kept the heavy, muscular, stout-limbed animals; others desired
riding and driving horses, so they saved for their use the light-limbed,
angular horses that had endurance and mettle. The following table gives
some of the different breeds and the places of their development:
[Illustration: FIG. 241.
Diagram shows the proper shape of the fore and hind legs of a horse.
When the straight lines divide the legs equally, the leg action is
straight and regular]
I. _Draft, or Heavy, Breeds_
1. Percheron, from the province of Perche, France.
2. French Draft, developed in France.
3. Belgian Draft, developed by Belgian farmers.
4. Clydesdale, the draft horse of Scotland.
5. Suffolk Punch, from the eastern part of England.
6. English Shire, also from the eastern part of England.
II. _Carriage, or Coach, Breeds_
1. Cleveland Bay, developed in England.
2. French Coach, the gentleman's horse of France.
3. German Coach, from Germany.
4. Oldenburg Coach, Oldenburg, Germany.
5. Hackney, the English high-stepper.
III. _Light, or Roadster, Breeds_
1. American Trotter, developed in America.
2. Thoroughbred, the English running horse.
3. American Saddle Horse, from Kentucky and Virginia.
There is a marked difference in the form and type of these horses, and
on this difference their usefulness depends.
[Illustration: FIG. 242. WIDE HOCK
This horse stands great strains and is not fatigued easily]
[Illustration: FIG. 243. NARROW HOCK
This horse becomes exhausted very easily]
The draft breeds have short legs, and hence their bodies are
comparatively close to the ground. The depth of the body should be about
the same as the length of leg. All draft horses should have upright
shoulders, so as to provide an easy support for the collar. The hock
should be wide, so that the animal shall have great leverage of muscle
for pulling. A horse having a narrow hock is not able to draw a heavy
load and is easily exhausted and liable to curb-diseases (see Figs. 242
and 243).
[Illustration: FIG. 244. THE ROADSTER TYPE]
The legs of all kinds of horses should be straight; a line dropped from
the point of the shoulder to the ground should divide the knees, canon,
fetlock, and foot into two equal parts. When the animal is formed in
this way the feet have room to be straight and square, with just the
breadth of a hoof between them (Fig. 241).
Roadsters are lighter in bone and less heavily muscled; their legs are
longer than those of the draft horses and, as horsemen say, more
"daylight" can be seen under the body. The neck is long and thin, but
fits nicely into the shoulders. The shoulders are sloping and long and
give the roadster ability to reach well out in his stride. The head is
set gracefully on the neck and should be carried with ease and
erectness.
Every man who is to deal with horses ought to become, by observation and
study, an expert judge of forms, qualities, types, defects, and
excellences.
[Illustration: FIG. 245. SIDE VIEW OF LEGS
The diagram shows how the straight lines ought to cross the legs of a
properly shaped horse]
The horse's foot makes an interesting study. The horny outside protects
the foot from mud, ice, and stones. Inside the hoof are the bones and
gristle that serve as cushions to diminish the shock received while
walking or running on hard roads or streets. When shoeing the horse the
frog should not be touched with the knife. It is very seldom that any
cutting need be done. Many blacksmiths do not know this and often
greatly injure the foot.
Since the horse has but a small stomach, the food given should not be
too bulky. In proportion to the horse's size, its grain ration should be
larger than that of other animals. Draft horses and mules, however, can
be fed a more bulky ration than other horses, because they have larger
stomachs and consequently have more room to store food.
[Illustration: FIG. 246. HOW TO MEASURE A HORSE]
The horse should be groomed every day. This keeps the pores of the skin
open and the hair bright and glossy. When horses are working hard, the
harness should be removed during the noon hour. During the cool seasons
of the year, whenever a horse is wet with sweat, it should on stopping
work, or when standing for awhile, be blanketed, for the animal is as
liable as man to get cold in a draft or from moisture evaporating
rapidly from its skin.
EXERCISE
If the pupil will take an ordinary tape measure, he can make some
measurements of the horse that will be very interesting as well as
profitable. Let him measure:
1. The height of the horse at the withers, 1 to 1.
2. The height of the horse at croup, 2 to 2.
3. Length of shoulder, 1 to 3.
4. Length of back, 4.
5. Length of head, 5.
6. Depth of body, 6 to 6.
7. Daylight under body, 7 to 7.
8. Distance from point of shoulder to quarter, 3 to 3.
9. Width of forehead.
10. Width between hips.
NOTE. Many interesting comparisons can be made (1) by
measuring several horses; (2) by studying the proportion between
parts of the same horse.
PROPORTIONS OF A HORSE
1. How many times longer is the body than the head? Do you get the
same result from different horses?
2. How does the height at the withers compare with the height at
the croup?
3. How do these compare with the distance from quarter to shoulder?
4. How does the length of the head compare with the thickness of
the body and with the open space, or "daylight," under the body?
SECTION LIV. CATTLE
All farm animals were once called _cattle_; now this term applies only
to beef and dairy animals--neat cattle.
Our improved breeds are descended from the wild ox of Europe and Asia,
and have attained their size and usefulness by care, food, and
selection. The uses of cattle are so familiar that we need scarcely
mention them. Their flesh is a part of man's daily food; their milk,
cream, butter, and cheese are on most tables; their hides go to make
leather, and their hair for plaster; their hoofs are used for glue, and
their bones for fertilizers, ornaments, buttons, and many other
purposes.
[Illustration: FIG. 247. A PRIZE-WINNER]
There are two main classes of cattle--beef breeds and dairy breeds. The
principal breeds of each class are as follows:
I. _Beef Breeds_
1. Aberdeen-Angus, bred in Scotland, and often called _doddies_.
2. Galloway, from Scotland.
3. Shorthorn, an English breed of cattle.
4. Hereford, also an English breed.
5. Sussex, from the county of Sussex, England.
II. _Dairy Breeds_
1. Jersey, from the Isle of Jersey.
2. Guernsey, from the Isle of Guernsey.
3. Ayrshire, from Scotland.
4. Holstein-Frisian, from Holland and Denmark.
5. Brown Swiss, from Switzerland.
Other breeds of cattle are Devon, Dutch Belted, Red-Polled, Kerry, and
West Highland.
In general structure there is a marked difference between the beef and
dairy breeds. This is shown in Figs. 248, 249. The beef cow is square,
full over the back and loins, and straight in the back. The hips are
covered evenly with flesh, the legs full and thick, the under line, or
stomach line, parallel to the back line, and the neck full and short.
The eye should be bright, the face short, the bones of fine texture, and
the skin soft and pliable.
[Illustration: FIG. 248. ABERDEEN-ANGUS COW (A BEEF TYPE)]
The dairy cow is widely different from the beef cow. She shows a decided
wedge shape when you look at her from front, side, or rear. The back
line is crooked, the hip bones and tail bone are prominent, the thighs
thin and poorly fleshed; there is no breadth to the back, as in the beef
cow, and little flesh covers the shoulders; the neck is long and thin.
The udder of the dairy cow is most important. It should be full but not
fleshy, be well attached behind, and extend well forward. The larger the
udder the more milk will be given.
The skin of the dairy cow, like that of the beef breeds, should be soft
and pliable and the bones fine-textured.
=The Dairy Type.= Because of lack of flesh on the back, loins, and
thighs, the cow of the dairy type is not profitably raised for beef, nor
is the beef so good as that of the beef types. This is because in the
dairy-animal food goes to produce milk rather than beef. In the same way
the beef cow gives little milk, since her food goes rather to fat than
to milk. For the same reasons that you do not expect a plow horse to win
on the race track, you do not expect a cow of the beef type to win
premiums as a milker.
[Illustration: FIG. 249. JERSEY COW (A DAIRY TYPE)]
"Scrub" cattle are not profitable. They mature slowly and consequently
consume much food before they are able to give any return for it. Even
when fattened, the fat and lean portions are not evenly distributed,
and "choice cuts" are few and small.
By far the cheapest method of securing a healthy and profitable herd of
dairy or beef cattle is to save only the calves whose sires are
pure-bred animals and whose mothers are native cows. In this way farmers
of even little means can soon build up an excellent herd.
=Improving Cattle.= The fact that it is not possible for every farmer to
possess pure-bred cattle is no reason why he should not improve the
stock he has. He can do this by using pure-bred sires that possess the
qualities most to be desired. Scrub stock can be quickly improved by the
continuous use of good sires. It is never wise to use grade, or
cross-bred, sires, since the best qualities are not fixed in them.
[Illustration: FIG. 250. HEAD OF A GALLOWAY COW]
Moreover, it is possible for every farmer to determine exactly the
producing-power of his dairy cows. When the cows are milked, the milk
should be weighed and a record kept. If this be done, it will be found
that some cows produce as much as five hundred, and some as much as ten
hundred, gallons a year, while others produce not more than two or three
hundred gallons. If a farmer kills or sells his poor cows and keeps his
best ones, he will soon have a herd of only heavy milkers. Ask your
father to try this plan. Read everything you can find about taking care
of cows and improving them, and then start a herd of your own.
=Conclusions.= (1) A cow with a tendency to get fat is not profitable
for the dairy. (2) A thin, open, angular cow will make expensive beef.
(3) "The sire is half the herd." This means that a good sire is
necessary to improve a herd of cattle. The improvement from scrubs
upward is as follows: the first generation is one-half pure; the second
is three-fourths pure; the third is seven-eighths pure; the fourth is
fifteen-sixteenths pure, etc. (4) By keeping a record of the quantity
and quality of milk each cow gives you can tell which are profitable to
raise from and which are not. (5) Good food, clean water, kindness, and
care are necessary to successful cattle-raising.
[Illustration: FIG. 251. HOLSTEIN COW]
The ownership of a well-bred animal usually arouses so much pride in the
owner that the animal receives all the care that it merits. The watchful
care given to such an animal leads to more thought of the other animals
on the farm, and often brings about the upbuilding of an entire herd.
SECTION LV. SHEEP
The sheep was perhaps the first animal domesticated by man, and to-day
the domesticated sheep is found wherever man lives. It is found
domesticated or wild in almost every climate, and finds means to thrive
where other animals can scarcely live; it provides man with meat and
clothing, and is one of the most profitable and most easily cared-for of
animals.
[Illustration: FIG. 252. A YOUNG SHEPHERD]
Sheep increase so rapidly, mature at such an early age, and have flesh
so wholesome for food that nearly every farm should have its flock.
Another consideration that may be urged in favor of sheep-raising is
that sheep improve the land on which they are pastured.
Sheep are docile and easily handled, and they live on a greater
diversity of food and require less grain than any other kind of live
stock. In mixed farming there is enough food wasted on most farms to
maintain a small flock of sheep.
[Illustration: FIG. 253. SHEEP HAVE LONG BEEN CALLED THE
GOLDEN-HOOFED ANIMALS]
Sheep may be divided into three classes:
I. _Fine-Wooled Breeds_
1. American Merino.
2. Delaine Merino.
3. Rambouillets.
4. Hampshire Down.
5. Oxford Down.
6. Cheviot.
II. _Medium-Wooled Breeds_
1. Southdown.
2. Shropshire.
3. Horned Dorset.
III. _Long-Wooled Breeds_
1. Leicester.
2. Lincoln.
3. Cotswold.
[Illustration: FIG. 254. IN THE PASTURE]
The first group is grown principally for wool, and mutton is secondary;
in the second group, mutton comes first and wool second; in the third
group both are important considerations. Wool is nature's protection for
the sheep. Have you ever opened the fleece and observed the clean skin
in which the fibers grow? These fibers, or hairs, are so roughened that
they push all dirt away from the skin toward the outside of the fleece.
Wool is valuable in proportion to the length and evenness of the fiber
and the density of the fleece.
EXERCISE
1. How many pounds ought a fleece of wool to weigh?
2. Which makes the better clothing, coarse or fine wool?
3. Why are sheep washed before being sheared?
4. Does cold weather trouble sheep? wet weather?
SECTION LVI. SWINE
The wild boar is a native of Europe, Asia, and Africa. The wild hogs are
the parents from which all our domestic breeds have sprung. In many
parts of the world the wild boar is still found. These animals are
active and powerful, and as they grow older are fierce and dangerous. In
their wild state they seek moist, sandy, and well-wooded places, close
to streams of water. Their favorite foods are fruits, grass, and roots,
but when pressed by hunger they will eat snakes, worms, and even higher
animals, like birds, fowls, and fish.
[Illustration: FIG. 255. WHICH WILL YOU RAISE?]
Man captured some of these wild animals, fed them abundant and
nutritious food, accustomed them to domestic life, selected the best of
them to raise from, and in the course of generations developed our
present breeds of hogs. The main changes brought about in hogs were
these: the legs became shorter, the snout and neck likewise shortened,
the shoulders and hams increased their power to take on flesh, and the
frame was strengthened to carry the added burden of flesh. As the animal
grew heavier it roamed less widely, and as it grew accustomed to man its
temper became less fierce.
[Illustration: FIG. 256. A PAIR OF PORKERS]
Meat can be more cheaply obtained from hogs than from any other animal.
When a hog is properly fed and cared for it will make the farmer more
money in proportion to cost than any other animal on the farm.
The most profitable type of hog has short legs, small bones, straight
back and under line, heavy hams, small well-dished head, and heavy
shoulders. The scrub and "razorback" hogs are very unprofitable, and
require an undue amount of food to produce a pound of gain. It requires
two years to get the scrub to weigh what a well-bred pig will weigh
when nine months old. Scrub hogs can be quickly changed in form and type
by the use of a pure-bred sire.
A boy whose parents were too poor to send him to college once decided to
make his own money and get an education. He bought a sow and began to
raise pigs. He earned the food for the mother and her pigs. His hogs
increased so rapidly that he had to work hard to keep them in food. By
saving the money he received from the sale of his hogs he had enough to
keep him two years in college. Suppose you try his plan, and let the hog
show you how fast it can make money.
[Illustration: FIG. 257. A GOOD TYPE]
We have several breeds of swine. The important ones are:
I. _Large Breeds_
1. Chester White.
2. Improved Yorkshire.
3. Tamworth.
II. _Medium Breeds_
1. Berkshire.
2. Poland-China.
3. Duroc-Jersey.
4. Cheshire.
III. _Small Breeds_
1. Victoria.
2. Suffolk.
3. Essex.
4. Small Yorkshire.
Hogs will be most successfully raised when kept as little as possible in
pens. They like the fields and the pasture grass, the open air and the
sunshine. Almost any kind of food can be given them. Unlike other stock,
they will devour greedily and tirelessly the richest feeding-stuffs.
The most desirable hog to raise is one that will produce a more or less
even mixture of fat and lean. Where only corn is fed, the body becomes
very fat and is not so desirable for food as when middlings, tankage,
cowpeas, or soy beans are added as a part of the ration.
[Illustration: FIG. 258. DINNER IS OVER]
When hogs are kept in pens, cleanliness is most important, for only by
cleanliness can disease be avoided.
SECTION LVII. FARM POULTRY
Our geese, ducks, turkeys, and domestic hens are all descendants of wild
fowls, and are more or less similar to them in appearance.
The earliest recorded uses of fowls were for food, for fighting, and for
sacrifice. To-day the domestic fowl has four well-defined
uses--egg-production, meat-production, feather-production, and
pest-destruction.
[Illustration: STANDARD-BRED FOWLS
Barred Plymouth Rocks, male and female; White Wyandottes, female and
male]
Hens of course produce most of our eggs. Some duck eggs are sold for
table use. Goose and duck body-feathers bring good prices. As
pest-destroyers turkeys and chickens are most useful. They eat large
numbers of bugs and worms that are harmful to crops. A little proper
attention would very largely increase the already handsome sum derived
from our fowls. They need dry, warm, well-lighted, and tidily kept
houses. They must have, if we want the best returns, an abundant supply
of pure water and a variety of nutritious foods. In cold, rainy, or
snowy weather they should have a sheltered yard, and in good weather
should be allowed a range wide enough to give them exercise. Their
bodies and their nests must be protected from every form of vermin.
For eggs, the Leghorn varieties are popular. Some hens of this breed
have been known to lay more than two hundred eggs in a year. Specially
cared-for flocks have averaged eleven or even twelve dozen eggs a year.
Farm flocks of ordinary breeds average less than eight dozen. Other
excellent egg breeds are the Spanish, Andalusian, and Minorca.
[Illustration: FIG. 259. COCK]
The principal so-called meat breeds are the Brahma, Cochin, and
Langshan. These are very large, but rather slow-growing fowls, and are
not noted as layers. They are far less popular in America, even as
meat-producers, than the general-purpose breeds.
The Plymouth Rock, Wyandotte, Rhode Island Red, and Orpington are the
leading general-purpose breeds. They are favorites because they are at
once good-sized, good layers, tame, and good mothers. The chicks of
these breeds are hardy and thrifty. In addition to these breeds, there
are many so-called fancy breeds that are prized for their looks rather
than for their value. Among these are the Hamburg, Polish, Sultan,
Silkie, and the many Bantam breeds.
The leading duck breeds are the Pekin, Aylesbury, Indian Runner,
Muscovy, Rouen, and Cayuga. The principal varieties of geese are the
Toulouse, Emden, Chinese, and African.
Among the best breeds of turkeys are the Bronze, White Holland,
Narragansett, Bourbon, Slate, and Buff.
Geese, ducks, and turkeys are not so generally raised as hens, but there
is a constant demand at good prices for these fowls.
[Illustration: FIG. 260. BROODER]
The varieties of the domestic hen are as follows:
I. _Egg Breeds_
1. Leghorn.
2. Minorca.
3. Spanish.
4. Blue Andalusian.
5. Anconas.
II. _Meat Breeds_
1. Brahma.
2. Cochin.
3. Langshan.
4. Dorking.
5. Cornish.
III. _General-Purpose Breeds_
1. Plymouth Rock.
2. Wyandotte.
3. Rhode Island Red.
4. Orpington.
IV. _Fancy Breeds_
1. Polish.
2. Game.
3. Sultan.
4. Bantam.
[Illustration: FIG. 261. BREEDING YARDS]
[Illustration: FIG. 262. INCUBATOR]
As the price of both eggs and fowls is steadily advancing, a great many
people are now raising fowls by means of an incubator for hatching, and
a brooder as a substitute for the mother hen.
The use of the incubator is extending each year and is now almost
universal where any considerable number of chicks are to be hatched.
Doubtless it will continue to be used wherever poultry-production is
engaged in on a large scale.
The brooder is employed to take care of the chickens as soon as they
leave the incubator.
SECTION LVIII. BEE CULTURE
Stock-raisers select breeds that are best adapted to their needs.
Plant-growers exercise great care in their choice of plants, selecting
for each planting those best suited to the conditions under which they
are to be grown. Undoubtedly a larger yield of honey could be had each
year if similar care were exercised in the selection of the breed of
bees.
[Illustration: FIG. 263. A CARNIOLAN WORKER]
To prove this, one has only to compare the yield of two different kinds.
The common East Indian honey bee rarely produces more than ten or twelve
pounds to a hive, while the Cyprian bee, which is a most industrious
worker, has a record of one thousand pounds in one season from a single
colony. This bee, besides being industrious when honey material is
plentiful, is also very persevering when such material is hard to find.
The Cyprians have two other very desirable qualities. They stand the
cold of winter well and stoutly defend their hives against robber bees
and other enemies.
The Italian is another good bee. This variety was brought into the
United States in 1860. While the yield from the Italian is somewhat less
than from the Cyprian, the Italian bees produce a whiter comb and are a
trifle more easily managed.
The common black or brown bee is found wild and domesticated throughout
the country. When honey material is abundant, these bees equal the
Italians in honey-production, but when the season is poor, they fall far
short in the amount of honey produced.
The purchase of a good Cyprian or Italian hive will richly repay the
buyer. Such a colony will cost more at the outset than an ordinary
colony, but will soon pay for its higher cost by greater production.
[Illustration: FIG. 264. A CARNIOLAN DRONE]
A beehive in the spring contains one queen, several hundred drones, and
from thirty-five to forty thousand workers. The duty of the queen is to
lay all the eggs that are to hatch the future bees. This she does with
untiring industry, often laying as many as four thousand in twenty-four
hours.
The worker bees do all the work. Some of them visit the flowers, take up
the nectar into the honey-sac, located in their abdomens, and carry it
to the hive. They also gather pollen in basketlike cavities in their
hind legs. Pollen and nectar are needed to prepare food for the young
bees. In the hive other workers create a breeze by buzzing with their
wings and produce heat by their activity--all to cause the water to
evaporate from the nectar and to convert it into honey before it is
sealed up in the comb. After a successful day's gathering you may often
hear these tireless workers buzzing till late into the night or even all
through the night.
You know that the bees get nectar from the flowers of various plants.
Some of the chief honey plants are alfalfa, buckwheat, horsemint,
sourwood, white sage, wild pennyroyal, black gum, holly, chestnut,
magnolia, and the tulip tree. The yield of honey may often be increased
by providing special pasturage for the bees. The linden tree, for
example, besides being ornamental and valuable for timber, produces a
most bee-inviting flower. Vetch, clover, and most of the legumes and
mints are valuable plants to furnish pasture for bees. Catnip may be
cultivated for the bees and sold as an herb as well.
[Illustration: FIG. 265. A CARNIOLAN QUEEN]
In spraying fruit trees to prevent disease you should always avoid
spraying when the trees are in bloom, since the poison of the spray
seriously endangers the lives of bees.
The eggs laid by the queen, if they are to produce workers, require
about twenty-one days to bring forth the perfect bee. The newly hatched
bee commences life as a nurse. When about ten days old it begins to try
its wings in short flights, and a few days later it begins active work.
The life of a worker bee in the busy season is only about six weeks. You
may distinguish young exercising bees from real workers by the fact that
they do not fly directly away on emerging from the hive, but circle
around a bit in order to make sure that they can recognize home again,
since they would receive no cordial welcome if they should attempt to
enter another hive. They hesitate upon returning from even these short
flights, to make sure that they are in front of their own door.
[Illustration: FIG. 266. GOOD FORM OF HIVE]
There are several kinds of enemies of the bee which all beekeepers
should know. One of these is the robber bee, that is, a bee from another
colony attempting to steal honey from the rightful owners, an attempt
often resulting in frightful slaughter. Much robbery can be avoided by
clean handling; that is, by leaving no honey about to cultivate a taste
for stolen sweets. The bee moth is another serious enemy. The larva of
the moth feeds on the wax. Keep the colonies of bees strong so that they
may be able to overcome this moth.
[Illustration: FIG. 267. ANTI-ROBBING ENTRANCE
_st_, stationary piece; _s_, slide; _p_, pin, or stop]
Queenless or otherwise weak colonies should be protected by a narrow
entrance that admits only one bee at a time, for such a pass may be
easily guarded. Fig. 267 shows a good anti-robbery entrance which may be
readily provided for every weak colony. Mice may be kept out by
tin-lined entrances. The widespread fear of the kingbird seems
unfounded. He rarely eats anything but drones, and few of them. This is
also true of the swallow. Toads, lizards, and spiders are, however, true
enemies of the honeybee.
EXERCISE
Can you recognize drones, workers, and queens? Do bees usually
limit their visits to one kind of blossom on any one trip? What
effect has the kind of flower on the flavor of the honey produced?
What kinds of flowers should the beekeeper provide for his bees? Is
the kingbird really an enemy to the bee?
SECTION LIX. WHY WE FEED ANIMALS
In the first place, we give various kinds of feed stuffs to our animals
that they may live. The heart beats all the time, the lungs contract and
expand, digestion is taking place, the blood circulates through the
body--something must supply force for these acts or the animal dies.
This force is derived from food.
In the next place, food is required to keep the body warm. Food in this
respect is fuel, and acts in the same way that wood or coal does in the
stove. Our bodies are warm all the time, and they are kept warm by the
food we eat at mealtime.
Then, in the third place, food is required to enable the body to
enlarge--to grow. If you feed a colt just enough to keep it alive and
warm, there will be no material present to enable it to grow; hence you
must add enough food to form bone and flesh and muscle and hair and fat.
In the fourth place, we feed to produce strength for work. An animal
poorly fed cannot do so much work at the plow or on the road as one that
receives all the food needed.
Both food and the force produced by it result from the activity of
plants. By means of sunlight and moisture a sprouting seed, taking out
of the air and soil different elements, grows into a plant. Then, just
as the plant feeds on the air and soil to get its growth, so the animal
feeds on the plant, to get its growth. Hence, since our animals feed
upon plants, we must find out what is in plants in order to know what
animal food consists of.
Plants contain protein, carbohydrates, fat, mineral matter, water, and
vitamins. You have seen protein compounds like the white of an egg, lean
meat, or the gluten of wheat. The bodies of plants do not contain very
much protein. On the other hand, all plant seeds contain a good deal of
this substance. Animals make use of protein to form new blood, muscles,
and organs. Because of the quality of protein, milk is the best food for
children and young animals.
The protein in some foods is of poor quality. To insure a well-balanced
supply of protein a variety in foods is desirable. Do not rely on a
single kind of mill feed, but combine several kinds, such as cotton-seed
meal, linseed meal, wheat bran and middlings, gluten, and similar grain
by-products. Tankage for young pigs and meat scraps for chickens are
high-grade proteins and are of animal origin.
It is no less important to get the necessary vitamins--those mysterious
substances that keep the body healthy and promote growth and well-being.
Scientists claim that many diseases are food-deficiency diseases--the
body gets out of order because these peculiar vitamins are lacking in
the food. Children require about one or two quarts of milk a day, fresh
fruits, cereal breakfast foods, leafy vegetables as salads, and cooked
vegetables.
Farm animals require the vitamins also. The legume pasture or hay, milk,
grain concentrates when supplied in variety, pasture grass, and green
forage crops are basic foods for farm animals. Very young animals should
have milk also.
Let us next consider the carbohydrates. Sometimes the words _starchy
foods_ are used to describe the carbohydrates. You have long known
forms of these in the white material of corn and of potatoes. The
carbohydrates are formed of three elements--carbon, oxygen, and
hydrogen. The use of these carbohydrates is to furnish to animal bodies
either heat or energy or to enable them to store fat.
In the next place, let us look at the fat in plant food. This consists
of the oil stored up in the seeds and other parts of the plant. The
grains contain most of the oil. Fat is used by the animal to make heat
and energy or to be stored away in the body.
The next animal food in the plant that we are to think about is the
mineral matter. The ashes of a burnt plant furnish a common example of
this mineral matter. The animal uses this material of the plant to make
bone, teeth, and tissue.
The last thing that the plant furnishes the animal is water--just common
water. Young plants contain comparatively large quantities of water.
This is one reason why they are soft, juicy, and palatable. But, since
animals get their water chiefly in another way, the water in feed stuffs
is not important.
WHAT THESE COMPOUNDS DO IN THE BODY
_Protein_
1. Forms flesh, bone, blood, internal organs, hair, and milk.
2. May be used to make fat.
3. May be used for heat.
4. May be used to produce energy.
_Carbohydrates_
1. Furnish body heat.
2. Furnish energy.
3. Make fat.
_Fat_
1. Furnishes body heat.
2. Furnishes energy.
3. Furnishes body fat.
_Mineral Matter_
Furnishes mineral matter for the bones in the body.
_Water_
Supplies water in the body.
CHAPTER XI
FARM DAIRYING
SECTION LX. THE DAIRY COW
Success in dairy farming depends largely upon the proper feeding of
stock. There are two questions that the dairy farmer should always ask
himself: Am I feeding as cheaply as I can? and, Am I feeding the best
rations for milk and butter production? Of course cows can be kept alive
and in fairly good milk flow on many different kinds of food, but in
feeding, as in everything else, there is an ideal to be sought.
[Illustration: FIG. 268. MILKING-TIME]
What, then, is an ideal ration for a dairy cow? Before trying to answer
this question the word _ration_ needs to be explained. By ration is
meant a sufficient quantity of food to support properly an animal for
one day. If the animal is to have a proper ration, we must bear in mind
what the animal needs in order to be best nourished. To get material for
muscle, for blood, for milk, and for some other things, the animal
needs, in the first place, food that contains protein. To keep warm and
fat, the animal must, in the second place, have food containing
carbohydrates and fats. These foods must be mixed in right proportions.
[Illustration: FIG. 269. A DAIRY]
With these facts in mind we are prepared for an answer to the question,
What is an ideal ration?
First, it is a ration that, without waste, furnishes both in weight and
bulk of dry matter a sufficient amount of digestible, nutritious food.
Second, it is a ration that is comparatively cheap.
Third, it is a ration in which the milk-forming food (protein) is
rightly proportioned to the heat-making and fat-making food
(carbohydrates and fat). Any ration in which this proportion is
neglected is badly balanced.
Now test one or two commonly used rations by these rules. Would a ration
of cotton-seed meal and cotton-seed hulls be a model ration? No. Such a
ration, since the seeds are grown at home, would be cheap enough.
However, it is badly balanced, for it is too rich in protein; hence it
is a wasteful ration. Would a ration of corn meal and corn stover be a
desirable ration? This, too, since the corn is home-grown, would be
cheap for the farmer; but, like the other, it is badly balanced, for it
contains too much carbohydrate food and is therefore a wasteful ration.
A badly balanced ration does harm in two ways: first, the milk flow of
the cow is lessened by such a ration; second, the cow does not
profitably use the food that she eats.
The following table gives an excellent dairy ration for the farmer who
has a silo. If he does not have a silo, some other food can be used in
place of the ensilage. The table also shows what each food contains. As
you grow older, it will pay you to study such tables most carefully.
===============================================================
| DIGESTIBLE MATTER
|----------------------------------
FEED STUFFS | Dry |Protein|Carbohydrates| Fat
|matter| | |
---------------------------------------------------------------
Cowpea hay = 15 pounds[1] | 13.50| 1.62 | 5.79 | .16
Corn stover = 10 pounds | 5.95| .17 | 3.24 | .07
Corn ensilage = 30 pounds | 6.27| .27 | 3.39 | .21
Cotton-seed meal = 2 pounds | 1.83| .74 | .33 | .24
Total = 57 pounds | 27.55| 2.80 | 12.75 | .68
[Footnote 1: Alfalfa or clover hay may take the place of cowpea hay.]
=Care of the Cow.= As the cow is one of the best money-makers on the
farm, she should, for this reason, if for no other, be comfortably
housed, well fed and watered, and most kindly treated. In your thoughts
for her well-being, bear the following directions in mind:
1. If you are not following a balanced ration, feed each day several
different kinds of food. In this way you will be least likely to waste
food.
2. Feed at regular hours. Cows, like people, thrive best when their
lives are orderly.
3. Milk at regular hours.
4. Brush the udder carefully with a moist cloth before you begin to
milk. Cleanliness in handling makes the milk keep longer.
5. Always milk in buckets or cups that have been scalded since the last
using. The hot water kills the bacteria that collect in the dents or
cracks of the utensil.
6. Never let the milk pail remain in the stable. Milk rapidly absorbs
impurities. These spoil the flavor and cause the milk to sour.
7. Never scold or strike the cow. She is a nervous animal, and rough
usage checks the milk flow.
[Illustration]
[Illustration: THREE GENERATIONS OF HIGH-BRED COWS]
SECTION LXI. MILK, CREAM, CHURNING, AND BUTTER
=Milk.= Milk is, as you know, nature's first food for mammals. This is
because milk is a model food--it contains water to slake thirst, ash to
make bone, protein to make flesh and muscle, and fat and sugar to keep
the body warm and to furnish energy.
=The Different Kinds of Milk.= Whole, or unskimmed, milk, skimmed milk,
and buttermilk are too familiar to need description. When a cow is just
fresh, her milk is called _colostrum_. Colostrum is rich in the very
food that the baby calf needs. After the calf is a few days old,
colostrum changes to what is commonly known as milk.
The following table shows the composition of each of the different forms
of milk:
=======================================================
| DIGESTIBLE MATTER IN 100 POUNDS
COMPOSITION OF MILK | Dry |Protein|Carbohydrates| Fat
|matter| | |
-------------------------------------------------------
Colostrum | 25.4 | 17.6 | 2.7 | 3.6
Milk (unskimmed) | 12.8 | 3.6 | 4.9 | 3.7
Skimmed milk | 9.4 | 2.9 | 5.2 | 1.3
Buttermilk | 9.9 | 3.9 | 4.0 | 1.1
A noticeable fact in this table is that skimmed milk differs from
unskimmed mainly in the withdrawal of the fat. Hence, if calves are fed
on skimmed milk, they should have in addition some food like corn meal
to take the place of the fat withdrawn. A calf cannot thrive on skimmed
milk alone. The amount of nourishing fat that a calf gets out of enough
milk to make a pound of butter can be bought, in the form of linseed or
corn meal, for a very small amount, while the butter-fat costs, for
table use, a much larger sum. Of course, then, it is not economical to
allow calves to use unskimmed milk. Some people undervalue skimmed milk;
with the addition of some fatty food it makes an excellent ration for
calves, pigs, and fowls.
Along with its dry matter, its protein, its carbohydrates, and its fats,
milk and its products possess another most important property. This
property is hard to describe, for its elements and its powers are not
yet fully understood. We do, however, know certainly this much: milk and
the foods made from it have power to promote health and favor growth in
a more marked degree than any other foods. It is generally agreed that
this is due to the health-promoting and health-preserving substances
which are called vitamines. Men of science are working with much care to
try to add to our knowledge of these vitamines, which have so marvelous
an influence on the health of all animals. Unless food, no matter how
good otherwise, contains these vitamines, it does not nourish the body
nor preserve bodily health as it should. A complete lack of vitamines in
our food would cause death. Since, then, milk and its products--butter,
cheese, curds--are rich in vitamines, these health-giving and
health-preserving foods should form a regular part of each person's
diet.
[Illustration: FIG. 270. AIRING THE CANS]
=Cream.= Cream is simply a mixture of butter-fat and milk. The
butter-fat floats in the milk in little globe-shaped bodies, or
globules. Since these globules are lighter than milk, they rise to the
surface. Skimming the milk is a mere gathering together of these
butter-fat globules. As most of the butter-fat is contained in the
cream, pains should be taken to get all the cream from the milk at
skimming time.
After the cream has been collected, it must be allowed to "ripen" or to
"sour" in order that it may be more easily churned. Churning is only a
second step to collect in a compact shape the fat globules. It often
happens that at churning-time the cream is too warm for successful
separation of the globules. Whenever this is the case the cream must be
cooled.
[Illustration: FIG. 271. A HAND SEPARATOR]
=The Churn.= Revolving churns without inside fixtures are best. Hence,
in buying, select a barrel or a square box churn. This kind of churn
"brings the butter" by the falling of the cream from side to side as the
churn is revolved. Never fill the churn more than one-third or one-half
full of cream. A small churn is always to be avoided.
=Churning.= The proper temperature for churning ranges from 58 deg. to 62 deg.
Fahrenheit. Test the cream when it is put into the churn. If it be too
cold, add warm water until the proper temperature is reached; if too
warm, add cold water or ice until the temperature is brought down to
62 deg.. Do not churn too long, for this spoils butter. As soon as the
granules of butter are somewhat smaller than grains of wheat, stop the
churn. Then draw off the buttermilk and at a temperature as low as 50 deg.
wash the butter in the churn. This washing with cold water so hardens
the granules that they do not mass too solidly and thus destroy the
grain.
=Butter.= The butter so churned is now ready to be salted. Use good fine
dairy salt. Coarse barrel salt is not fit for butter. The salt can be
added while the butter is still in the churn or after it is put upon the
butter-worker. Never work by hand. The object of working is to get the
salt evenly distributed and to drive out some of the brine. It is
usually best to work butter twice. The two workings bring about a more
even mixture of the salt with the butter and drive off more water. But
one cannot be too particular not to overwork butter. Delicate coloring,
attractive stamping with the dairy owner's special stamp, and proper
covering with paper cost little and of course add to the ready and
profitable sale of butter.
[Illustration: FIG. 272. A POWER CHURN]
DAIRY RULES
_Stable and Cows_
1. Whitewash the stable once or twice each year; use land plaster, muck,
or loam daily in the manure-gutters.
2. On their way to pasture or milking-place, do not allow the cows to be
driven at a faster gait than a comfortable walk.
3. Give abundance of pure water.
4. Do not change feed suddenly.
5. Keep salt always within reach of each cow.
_Milking_
1. Milk with dry hands.
2. Never allow the milk to touch the milker's hands.
3. Require the milker to be clean in person and dress.
4. Milk quietly, quickly, thoroughly. Never leave a drop of milk in the
cow's udder.
5. Do not allow cats, dogs, or other animals around at milking-time.
_Utensils_
1. Use only tin or metal cans and pails.
2. See that all utensils are thoroughly clean and free from rust.
3. Require all cans and pails to be scalded immediately after they are
used.
4. After milking, keep the utensils inverted in pure air, and sun them,
if possible, until they are wanted for use.
5. Always sterilize the churn with steam or boiling water before and
after churning. This prevents any odors or bad flavors from affecting
the butter. All cans, pails, and bottles should also be sterilized
daily.
[Illustration]
SECTION LXII. HOW MILK SOURS
[Illustration: FIG. 273. MICROSCOPIC APPEARANCE OF PURE AND IMPURE MILK
At the left, pure milk; at the right, milk after standing in a warm room
for a few hours in a dirty dish, showing, besides the fat-globules, many
forms of bacteria]
On another page you have been told how the yeast plant grows in cider
and causes it to sour, and how bacteria sometimes cause disease in
animals and plants. Now you must learn what these same living forms have
to do with the souring of milk, and maybe you will not forget how you
can prevent your milk from souring. In the first place, milk sours
because bacteria from the air fall into the milk, begin to grow, and
very shortly change the sugar of the milk to an acid. When this acid
becomes abundant, the milk begins to curdle. As you know, the bacteria
are in air, in water, and in barn dust; they stick on bits of hay and
stick to the cow. They are most plentiful, however, in milk that has
soured; hence, if we pour a little sour milk into a pail of fresh milk,
the fresh milk will sour very quickly, because we have, so to speak,
"seeded" or "planted" the fresh milk with the souring germs. No one, of
course, ever does this purposely in the dairy, yet people sometimes do
what amounts to the same thing--that is, put fresh milk into poorly
cleaned pails or pans, the cracks and corners of which are cozy homes
for millions of germs left from the last sour milk contained in the
vessel. It follows, then, that all utensils used in the dairy should be
thoroughly scalded so as to kill all germs present, and particular care
should be taken to clean the cracks and crevices, for in them the germs
lurk.
In addition to this thorough cleansing with hot water, we should be
careful never to stir up the dust of the barn just before milking. Such
dusty work as pitching hay or stover or arranging bedding should be done
either after or long before milking-time, for more germs fall into the
milk if the air be full of dust.
To further avoid germs the milker should wear clean overalls, should
have clean hands, and, above all, should never wet his hands with milk.
This last habit, in addition to being filthy, lessens the keeping power
of the milk. The milker should also moisten the parts of the cow which
are nearest him, so that dust from the cow's sides may not fall into the
milker's pail. For greater cleanliness and safety many milkmen curry
their cows.
The first few streams from each teat should be thrown away, because the
teat at its mouth is filled with milk which, having been exposed to the
air, is full of germs, and will do much toward souring the other milk in
the pail. Barely a gill will be lost by throwing the first drawings
away, and this of the poorest milk too. The increase in the keeping
quality of the milk will much more than repay the small loss. If these
precautions are taken, the milk will keep several hours or even several
days longer than milk carelessly handled. By taking these steps to
prevent germs from falling into the milk, a can of milk was once kept
sweet for thirty-one days.
The work of the germ in the dairy is not, however, confined to souring
the milk. Certain kinds of germs give to the different sorts of cheeses
their marked flavors and to butter its flavor. If the right germ is
present, cheese or butter gets a proper flavor. Sometimes undesirable
germs gain entrance and give flavors that we do not like. Such germs
produce cheese or butter diseases. "Bitter butter" is one of these
diseases. To keep out all unpleasant meddlers, thoroughly cleanse and
scald every utensil.
EXERCISE
What causes milk to sour? Why do unclean utensils affect the milk?
How should milk be cared for to prevent its souring? Prepare two
samples, one carefully, the other carelessly. Place them side by
side. Which keeps longer? Why?
SECTION LXIII. THE BABCOCK MILK-TESTER
It is not sufficient for a farmer or a dairyman to know how much milk
each of his cows yields. He should also know how rich the milk is in
butter-fat. Wide-awake makers of butter and cheese now buy milk, not by
the pound or by the gallon, but by the amount of butter-fat contained in
each pound or gallon of milk. A gallon of milk containing four and a
half per cent of fat will consequently be worth more than a gallon
containing only three per cent of fat. So it may happen that a cow
giving only two gallons of milk may pay a butter-maker more than a cow
giving three gallons of milk. Of course it is easy to weigh or measure
the quantity of milk given by a cow, and most milkers keep this record;
but until recent years there was no way to find out the amount of fat in
a cow's milk except by a slow and costly chemical test. Dairymen could
only guess at the richness of milk.
In 1890 Dr. S. M. Babcock of the Wisconsin Experiment Station invented a
wonderful little machine that quickly and cheaply measures the fat in
milk. Few machines are more useful. So desirous was Dr. Babcock of
helping the farmers that he would not add to the cost of his machine by
taking out a patent on his invention. His only reward has been the fame
won by the invention of the machine, which bears his name. This most
useful tester is now made in various sizes so that every handler of milk
may buy one suited to his needs and do his own testing at very little
cost.
The operation of the machine is very simple. Suppose that the members of
the class studying this book have been asked to take a Babcock machine
and test the milk of a small herd of cows. They can readily do so by
following these directions:
While the milk is still warm from the first cow to be tested, mix it
thoroughly by pouring it at least four times from one vessel to another.
A few ounces of this mixed milk is then taken for a sample, and
carefully marked with the name of the cow. A number is also put on the
sample, and both the cow's name and the number entered in a notebook. A
small glass instrument, called a pipette, comes with each machine. Put
one end of the pipette into the milk sample and the other end into the
mouth. Suck milk into the pipette until the milk comes up to the mark on
the side of the pipette. As soon as the mark is reached, withdraw the
pipette from the mouth and quickly press the forefinger on the mouth
end. The pressure of the finger will keep the milk from running out.
Then put the lower end of the pipette into one of the small long-necked
bottles of the machine, and, lifting the finger, allow the milk to flow
gently into the bottle. Expel all the milk by blowing through the
pipette.
The next step is to add a strong, biting acid known as sulphuric acid to
the test-bottle into which you have just put the milk. A glass marked to
show just how much acid to use also comes with the machine. Fill this
glass measure to the mark. Then pour the acid carefully into the
test-bottle. Be sure not to drop any of the acid on your hands or your
clothes. As the acid is heavier than the milk, it will sink to the
bottom of the bottle. With a gentle whirling motion, shake the bottle
until the two fluids are thoroughly mixed. The mixture will turn a dark
brown and become very warm.
Now fill the other bottles in the same way with samples drawn from
different cows. Treat all the samples precisely as you did the first. Do
not forget to put on each sample the name of the cow giving the milk and
on each test-bottle a number corresponding to the name of the cow.
You are now ready to put the test-bottles in the sockets of the machine.
Arrange the bottles in the sockets so that the whirling frame of the
machine will be balanced. Fit the cover on the machine and turn the
handle slowly. Gradually gain in speed until the machine is whirled
rapidly. Continue the turning for about seven minutes at the speed
stated in the book of directions.
After this first turning is finished, pour enough hot water into each
test-bottle to cause the fat to rise to the neck of the bottle. Re-cover
the machine and turn for one minute. Again add hot water to each bottle
until all the fat rises into the neck of the bottle and again turn one
minute.
There remains now only the reading of the record. On the neck of each
bottle there are marks to measure the amount of fat. If the fat inside
the tube reaches only from the lowest mark to the second mark, then
there is only one per cent of fat in this cow's milk. This means that
the owner of the cow gets only one pound of butter-fat from each
hundred pounds of her milk. Such a cow would not be at all profitable to
a butter-seller. If the fat in another test-bottle reaches from the
lowest mark to the fourth mark, then you put in your record-book that
this cow's milk contains four per cent of butter-fat. This record shows
that the second cow's milk yields four pounds of fat to every hundred
pounds of milk. This cow is three times more valuable to a butter-maker
than the first cow. In the same way add one more per cent for each
higher mark reached by the fat. Four and one-half per cent is a good
record for a cow to make. Some cows yield as high as five or six per
cent but they do not generally keep up this record all the year.
[Illustration: FIG. 274. BABCOCK TESTER AND HOW TO USE IT
The tester, acid, acid measure, test-bottle, and thermometer at bottom;
filling the pipette on right; adding the acid and measuring the fat at
top]
The Babcock tester shows only the amount of pure butter-fat in the milk.
It does not tell the exact amount of finished butter which is made from
100 pounds of milk. This is because butter contains a few other things
in addition to pure butter-fat. Finished and salted butter weighs on an
average about one sixth more than the fat shown by the tester. Hence to
get the exact amount of butter in every 100 pounds of milk, you will
have to add one sixth to the record shown by the tester. Suppose, for
example, you took one sample from 600 pounds of milk and that your test
showed 4 per cent of fat in every 100 pounds of milk. Then, as you had
600 pounds of milk, you would have 24 pounds of butter-fat. This fat,
after it has been salted and after it has absorbed moisture as butter
does, will gain one sixth in weight. As one sixth of 24 is 4, this new 4
pounds must be added to the weight of the butter-fat. Hence the 600
pounds of milk would produce about 28 pounds of butter.
EXERCISE
1. Find the number of pounds of butter in 1200 pounds of milk that
tests 3 per cent of butter-fat.
2. A cow yields 4800 pounds of milk in a year. Her milk tests 4 per
cent of butter-fat. Find the total amount of butter-fat she yields.
Find also the total amount of butter.
3. The milk of two cows was tested: one yielded in a year 6000
pounds of milk that tested 3 per cent of fat; the other yielded
5000 pounds that tested 4 per cent. Which cow yielded the more
butter-fat? What was the money value of the butter produced by each
if butter-fat is worth twenty-five cents a pound?
CHAPTER XII
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION LXIV. GROWING FEED STUFFS ON THE FARM
Economy in raising live stock demands the production of all "roughness"
or roughage materials on the farm. By roughness, or roughage, of course
you understand that bulky food, like hay, grass, clover, stover, etc.,
is meant. It is possible to purchase all roughage materials and yet make
a financial success of growing farm animals, but this certainly is not
the surest way to succeed. Every farm should raise all its feed stuffs.
In deciding what forage and grain crops to grow we should decide:
1. The crops best suited to our soil and climate.
2. The crops best suited to our line of business.
3. The crops that will give us the most protein.
4. The crops that produce the most.
5. The crops that will keep our soil in the best condition.
1. _The crops best suited to our soil and climate._ Farm crops, as every
child of the farm knows, are not equally adapted to all soils and
climates. Cotton cannot be produced where the climate is cool and the
seasons short. Timothy and blue grass are most productive on cool,
limestone soils. Cowpeas demand warm, dry soils. But in spite of
climatic limitations, Nature has been generous in the wide variety of
forage she has given us.
Our aim should be to make the best use of what we have, to improve by
selection and care those kinds best adapted to our soil and climate, and
to secure, by better methods of growing and curing, the greatest yields
at the least possible cost.
2. _The crops best suited to our line of business._ A farmer necessarily
becomes more or less of a specialist; he gathers those kinds of live
stock about him which he likes best and which he finds the most
profitable. He should, on his farm, select for his main crops those that
he can grow with the greatest pleasure and with the greatest profit.
[Illustration: FIG. 275. FILLING THE BARN WITH ROUGHAGE FROM THE FARM]
The successful railroad manager determines by practical experience what
distances his engines and crews ought to run in a day, what coal is most
economical for his engines, what schedules best suit the needs of his
road, what trains pay him best. These and a thousand and one other
matters are settled by the special needs of his road.
Ought the man who wants to make his farm pay be less prudent and less
far-sighted? Should not his past failures and his past triumphs decide
his future? If he be a dairy farmer, ought he not by practical tests to
settle for himself not only what crops are most at home on his land but
also what crops in his circumstances yield him the largest returns in
milk and butter? If swine-raising be his business, how long ought he to
guess what crop on his land yields him the greatest amount of hog food?
Should a colt be fed on one kind of forage when the land that produced
that forage would produce twice as much equally good forage of another
kind? All these questions the prudent farmer should answer promptly and
in the light of wise experiments.
3. _The crops that will give us the most protein._ It is the farmer's
business to grow all the grass and forage that his farm animals need. He
ought never to be obliged to purchase a bale of forage. Moreover, he
should grow mainly those crops that are rich in protein materials, for
example, cowpeas, alfalfa, and clover. If such crops are produced on the
farm, there will be little need of buying so much cotton-seed meal,
corn, and bran for feeding purposes.
4. _The crops that produce the most._ We often call a crop a crop
without considering how much it yields. This is a mistake. We ought to
grow, when we have choice of two crops, the one that is the best and the
most productive on the farm. Average corn, for instance, yields on an
acre at least twice the quantity of feeding-material that timothy does.
5. _The crops that will keep our soil in the best condition._ A good
farmer should always be thinking of how to improve his soil. He wants
his land to support him and to maintain his children after he is dead.
Since cowpeas, clover, and alfalfa add atmospheric nitrogen to the soil
and at the same time are the best feeding-materials, it follows that
these crops should hold an important place in every system of
crop-rotation. By proper rotating, by proper terracing, and by proper
drainage, land may be made to retain its fertility for generations.
EXERCISE
1. Why are cowpeas, clover, and alfalfa so important to the farmer?
2. What is meant by the protein of a food?
3. Why is it better to feed the farm crops to animals on the farm
rather than to sell these crops?
SECTION LXV. FARM TOOLS AND MACHINES
The drudgery of farm life is being lessened from year to year by the
invention or improvement of farm tools and machines. Perhaps some of you
know how tiresome was the old up-and-down churn dasher that has now
generally given place to the "quick-coming" churns. The toothed,
horse-drawn cultivator has nearly displaced "the man with the hoe,"
while the scythe, slow and back-breaking, is everywhere getting out of
the way of the mowing-machine and the horserake. The old heavy,
sweat-drawing grain-cradle is slinking into the backwoods, and in its
place we have the horse-drawn or steam-drawn harvester that cuts and
binds the grain, and even threshes and measures it at one operation.
Instead of the plowman's wearily making one furrow at a time, the
gang-plows of the plains cut many furrows at one time, and instead of
walking the plowman rides. The shredder and husker turns the hitherto
useless cornstalk into food, and at the same time husks, or shucks, the
corn.
The farmer of the future must know three things well: first, what
machines he can profitably use; second, how to manage these machines;
third, how to care for these machines.
[Illustration: FIG. 276. PROPERLY PROTECTED TOOLS AND MACHINES]
[Illustration: FIG. 277. UNPROTECTED TOOLS AND MACHINES]
[Illustration: FIG. 278. THE HARVESTER AT WORK]
[Illustration: FIG. 279. IN NEED OF IMPROVEMENT]
The machinery that makes farming so much more economical and that makes
the farmer's life so much easier and more comfortable is too complicated
to be put into the hands of bunglers who will soon destroy it, and it is
too costly to be left in the fields or under trees to rust and rot.
If it is not convenient for every farmer to have a separate tool-house,
he should at least set apart a room in his barn, or a shed for storing
his tools and machines. As soon as a plow, harrow, cultivator--indeed
any tool or machine--has finished its share of work for the season, it
should receive whatever attention it needs to prevent rusting, and
should be carefully housed.
Such care, which is neither costly nor burdensome, will add many years
to the life of a machine.
SECTION LXVI. LIMING THE LAND
Occasionally, when a cook puts too much vinegar in a salad, the dish
becomes so sour that it is unfit to eat. The vinegar which the cook uses
belongs to a large group of compounds known as acids. The acids are
common in nature. They have the power not only of making salads sour but
also of making land sour. Frequently land becomes so sour from acids
forming in it that it will not bear its usual crops. The acids must then
be removed or the land will become useless.
The land may be soured in several ways. Whenever a large amount of
vegetable matter decays in land, acids are formed, and at times sourness
of the soil results. Often soils sour because they are not well drained
or because, from lack of proper tillage, air cannot make its way into
the soil. Sometimes all these causes may combine to produce sourness.
Since most crops cannot thrive on very sour soil, the farmer must find
some method of making his land sweet again.
So far as we now know, liming the land is the cheapest and surest way of
overcoming the sourness. In addition to sweetening the soil by
overcoming the acids, lime aids the land in other ways: it quickens the
growth of helpful bacteria; it loosens stiff, heavy clay soils and
thereby fits them for easier tillage; it indirectly sets free the potash
and phosphoric acid so much needed by plants; and it increases the
capillarity of soils.
However, too much must not be expected of lime. Often a farmer's yield
is so increased after he has scattered lime over his fields that he
thinks that lime alone will keep his land fertile. This belief explains
the saying, "Lime enriches the father but beggars the son." The
continued use of lime without other fertilization will indeed leave poor
land for the son. Lime is just as necessary to plant growth as the
potash and nitrogen and phosphoric acid about which we hear so much, but
it cannot take the place of these plant foods. Its duty is to aid, not
to displace them.
We can tell by the taste when salads are too sour; it is more difficult
to find out whether land is sour. There are, however, some methods that
will help to determine the sourness of the soil.
In the first place, if land is unusually sour, you can determine this
fact by a simple test. Buy a pennyworth of blue litmus paper from a drug
store. Mix some of the suspected soil with a little water and bury the
litmus paper in the mixture. If the paper turns red the soil is sour.
In the second place, the leguminous crops are fond of lime. Clover and
vetch remove so much lime from the soil that they are often called lime
plants. If clover and vetch refuse to grow on land on which they
formerly flourished, it is generally, though not always, a sign that the
land needs lime.
In the third place, when water grasses and certain weeds spring up on
land, that land is usually acid, and lime will be helpful. Moreover,
fields adjoining land on which cranberries, raspberries, blackberries,
or gallberries are growing wild, may always be suspected of more or less
sourness.
Four forms of lime are used on land. These, each called by different
names, are as follows:
First, quicklime, which is also called burnt lime, caustic lime,
builders' lime, rock lime, and unslaked lime.
Second, air-slaked lime, which is also known as carbonate of lime,
agricultural lime, marl, and limestone.
Third, water-slaked, or hydrated, lime.
Fourth, land plaster, or gypsum. This form of lime is known to the
chemists as sulphate of lime. Do not forget that this last form is never
to be used on sour lands. We shall therefore not consider it further.
Air-slaked lime is simply quicklime which has taken from the air a gas
called carbon dioxide. This is the same gas that you breathe out from
your lungs.
Water-slaked lime is quicklime to which water has been added. In other
words, both of these are merely weakened forms of quicklime. One hundred
pounds of quicklime is equal in richness to 132 pounds of water-slaked
lime and to 178 pounds of air-slaked lime. These figures should be
remembered by a farmer when he is buying lime. If he can buy a fair
grade of quicklime delivered at his railway station for $5.00 a ton, he
cannot afford to pay more than $3.75 a ton for water-slaked lime, nor
more than $2.75 for air-slaked lime of equal grade. Quicklime should
always be slaked before it is applied to the soil.
As a rule lime should be spread broadcast and then harrowed or disked
thoroughly into the soil. This is best done after the ground has been
plowed. For pastures or meadows air-slaked lime is used as a
top-dressing. When air-slaked lime is used it may be spread broadcast in
the spring; the other forms should be applied in the fall or in the
early winter.
SECTION LXVII. BIRDS
What do birds do in the world? is an important question for us to think
about. First, we must gain by observation and by personal acquaintance
with the living birds a knowledge of their work and their way of doing
it. In getting this knowledge, let us also consider what we can do for
our birds to render their work as complete and effective as possible.
Think of what the birds are doing on every farm, in every garden, and
about every home in the land. Think of the millions of beautiful wings,
of the graceful and attractive figures, of the cunning nests, and of the
singing throats! Do you think that the whole service of the birds is to
be beautiful, to sing charmingly, and to rear their little ones? By no
means is this their chief service to man. Aside from these services the
greatest work of birds is to destroy insects. It is one of the wise
provisions of nature that many of the most brilliantly winged and most
enchanting songsters are our most practical friends.
Not all birds feed on insects and animals; but even those that eat but a
small amount of insect food may still destroy insects that would have
damaged fruit and crops much more than the birds themselves do.
As to their food, birds are divided into three general classes. First,
those that live wholly or almost wholly on insects. These are called
insectivorous birds. Chief among these are the warblers, cuckoos,
swallows, martins, flycatchers, nighthawks, whippoorwills, swifts, and
humming-birds. We cannot have too many of these birds. They should be
encouraged and protected. They should be supplied with shelter and
water.
Birds of the second class feed by preference on fruits, nuts, and grain.
The bluebird, robin, wood thrush, mocking-bird, catbird, chickadee,
cedar-bird, meadow lark, oriole, jay, crow, and woodpecker belong to
this group. These birds never fail to perform a service for us by
devouring many weed seeds.
[Illustration: FIG. 280. A KINGBIRD]
The third class is known as the hard-billed birds. It includes those
birds which live principally on seeds and grain--the canary, goldfinch,
sparrow, and some others.
Birds that come early, like the bluebird, robin, and redwing, are of
special service in destroying insects before the insects lay their eggs
for the season.
The robins on the lawn search out the caterpillars and cutworms. The
chipping sparrow and the wren in the shrubbery look out for all kinds of
insects. They watch over the orchard and feed freely on the enemies of
the apple and other fruit trees. The trunks of these trees are often
attacked by borers, which gnaw holes in the bark and wood, and often
cause the death of the trees. The woodpeckers hunt for these appetizing
borers and by means of their barbed tongues bring them from their
hiding-places. On the outside of the bark of the trunk and branches the
bark lice work. These are devoured by the nuthatches, creepers, and
chickadees.
During the winter the bark is the hiding-place for hibernating insects,
which, like plant lice, feed in summer on the leaves. Throughout the
winter a single chickadee will destroy great numbers of the eggs of the
cankerworm moth and of the plant louse. The blackbirds, meadow larks,
crows, quail, and sparrows are the great protectors of the meadow and
field crops. These birds feed on the army worms and cutworms that do so
much injury to the young shoots; they also destroy the chinch bug and
the grasshopper, both of which feed on cultivated plants.
[Illustration: FIG. 281. A WARBLER]
A count of all the different kinds of animals shows that insects make up
nine tenths of them. Hence it is easy to see that if something did not
check their increase they would soon almost overrun the earth. Our
forests and orchards furnish homes and breeding-places for most of these
insects. Suppose the injurious insects were allowed to multiply
unchecked in the forests, their numbers would so increase that they
would invade our fields and create as much terror among the farmers as
they did in Pharaoh's Egypt. The birds are the only direct friends man
has to destroy these harmful insects. What benefactors, then, these
little feathered neighbors are!
It has been estimated that a bird will devour thirty insects daily. Even
in a widely extended forest region a very few birds to the acre, if they
kept up this rate, would daily destroy many bushels of insects that
would play havoc with the neighboring orchards and fields.
Do not imagine, however, that to destroy insects is the only use of
birds. The day is far more delightful when the birds sing, and when we
see them flit in and out, giving us a glimpse now and then of their
pretty coats and quaint ways. By giving them a home we can surround
ourselves with many birds, sweet of song and brilliant of plumage.
[Illustration: FIG. 282. THE HAIRY WOODPECKER]
If the birds felt that man were a friend and not a foe, they would often
turn to him for protection. During times of severe storm, extreme
drought, or scarcity of food, if the birds were sufficiently tamed to
come to man as their friend, as they do in rare cases now, a little food
and shelter might tide them over the hard time and their service
afterwards would repay the outlay a thousandfold. If the boys in your
families would build bird-houses about the house and barn and in shade
trees, they might save yearly a great number of birds. In building these
places of shelter and comfort, due care must be taken to keep them
clear of English sparrows and out of the reach of cats and bird-dogs.
Whatever we do to attract the birds to make homes on the premises must
be done at the right time and in the right way. Think out carefully what
materials to provide for them. Bits of string, linen, cotton, yarn, tow
and other waste material, all help to induce a pair to build in the
garden.
[Illustration: FIG. 283. PROTECTING OUR FRIENDS]
It is an interesting study--the preparation of homes for the birds.
Trees may be pruned to make inviting crotches. A tangled, overgrown
corner in the garden will invite some birds to nest.
Wrens, bluebirds, chickadees, martins, and some other varieties are all
glad to set up housekeeping in man-made houses. The proper size for a
bird-room is easily remembered. Give each room six square inches of
floor space and make it eight inches high. Old, weathered boards should
be used; or, if paint is employed, a dull color to resemble an old
tree-trunk will be most inviting. A single opening near the top should
be made two inches in diameter for the larger birds; but if the house is
to be headquarters for the wren, a one-inch opening is quite large
enough, and the small door serves all the better to keep out English
sparrows.
The barn attic should be turned over to the swallows. Small holes may be
cut high up in the gables and left open during the time that the
swallows remain with us. They will more than pay for shelter by the good
work they do in ridding the barn of flies, gnats, and mosquitoes.
SECTION LXVIII. FARMING ON DRY LANDS
Almost in the center of the western half of our continent there is a
vast area in which very little rain falls. This section includes nearly
three hundred million acres of land. It stretches from Canada on the
north into Texas on the south, and from the Missouri River (including
the Dakotas and western Minnesota) on the east to the Rocky Mountains on
the west. In this great area farming has to be done with little water.
This sort of farming is therefore called "dry-farming."
The soil in this section is as a rule very fertile. Therefore the
difference between farming in this dry belt and farming in most of the
other sections of our country is a difference mainly due to a lack of
moisture.
As water is so scarce in this region two things are of the utmost
importance: first, to save all the rain as it falls; second, to save all
the water after it has fallen. To save the falling rain it is necessary
for the ground to be in such a condition that none of the much-needed
rain may run off. Every drop should go into the soil. Hence the farmer
should never allow his top soil to harden into a crust. Such a crust
will keep the rain from sinking into the thirsty soil. Moreover the soil
should be deeply plowed. The deeper the soil the more water it can hold.
The land should also be kept as porous as possible, for water enters a
porous soil freely. The addition of humus in the form of vegetable
manures will keep the soil in the porous condition needed. Second, after
the water has entered the soil it is important to hold it there so that
it may supply the growing crops. If the land is allowed to remain
untilled after a rain or during a hot spell, the water in it will
evaporate too rapidly and thus the soil, like a well, will go dry too
soon. To prevent this the top soil should be stirred frequently with a
disk or smoothing harrow. This stirring will form a mulch of dry soil on
the surface, and this will hold the water. Other forms of mulch have
been suggested, but the soil mulch is the only practical one. It must be
borne in mind that this surface cultivation must be regularly kept up if
the moisture is to be retained.
[Illustration: FIG. 284. THE DISK HARROW]
Some experiments in wheat-growing have shown how readily water might be
saved if plowing were done at the right time. Wheat sowed on land that
was plowed as soon as the summer crops were taken off yielded a very
much larger return than wheat sowed on land that remained untilled for
some time after the summer crops were gathered. This difference in yield
on lands of the same fertility was due to the fact that the early
plowing enabled the land to take up a sufficient quantity of moisture.
[Illustration: FIG. 285. RED KAFIR CORN IN SHOCK]
In addition to a vigilant catching and saving of water, the farmer in
these dry climates must give his land the same careful attention that
lands in other regions need. The seed-bed should be most carefully
prepared. It should be deep, porous, and excellent in tilth. During the
growing season all crops should be frequently cultivated. The harrow,
the cultivator, and the plow should be kept busy. The soil should be
kept abundantly supplied with humus.
Some crops need a little different management in dry-farming. Corn, for
example, does best when it is listed; that is, planted so that it will
come up three or four inches beneath the surface. If planted in this
way, it roots better, stands up better, and requires less work.
Just as breeders study what animals are best for their climates, so
farmers in the dry belt should study what crops are best suited to their
lands. Some crops, like the sorghums and Kafir corn, are peculiarly at
home in scantily watered lands. Others do not thrive. Experience is the
only sure guide to the proper selection.
To sum up, then, farmers can grow good crops in these lands only when
four things are done: first, the land must be thoroughly tilled so that
water can freely enter the soil; second, the land must be frequently
cultivated so that the water will be kept in the soil; third, the crops
must be properly rotated so as to use to best advantage the food and
water supply; fourth, humus must be freely supplied so as to keep the
soil in the best possible condition.
SECTION LXIX. IRRIGATION
Irrigation is the name given to the plan of supplying water in large
quantities to growing crops. Since the dawn of history this practice has
been more or less followed in Asia, in Africa, and in Europe. The
Spanish settlers in the southwestern part of America were probably the
first to introduce this custom into our country. In New Mexico there is
an irrigating trench that has been in constant use for three hundred
years.
[Illustration: FIG. 286. PUMPING WATER FOR IRRIGATION]
The most common source of water for irrigating purposes is a river or a
smaller stream. Artesian wells are used in some parts of the country.
Windmills are sometimes used when only a small supply of water is
needed. Engines, hydraulic rams, and water-wheels are also employed. The
water-wheel is one of the oldest and one of the most useful methods of
raising water from streams. There are thousands of these in use in the
dry regions of the West. Small buckets are fastened to a large wheel,
which is turned by the current of a stream. As the wheel turns, the
buckets are filled, raised, and then emptied into a trough called a
flume. The water flows through the flume into the irrigating ditches,
which distribute it as it is needed in the fields. In some parts of
California and other comparatively dry sections, wells are sunk in or
near the beds of underground streams, and then the water is pumped into
ditches which convey it to the fields to be irrigated.
Engines are often used for pumping water from streams and transferring
it to ditches or canals. The canals distribute the water over the land
or over the growing crops.
[Illustration: FIG. 287. THE MAIN DITCH OF AN IRRIGATION PLANT]
None of these methods, however, can be used for watering very large
areas of land. Hence, as the value of farm lands increased other methods
were sought. Shrewd men began to turn longing eyes on the wide stretches
of barren land in the West. They knew that these waste lands, seemingly
so unfertile, would become most fruitful as soon as water was turned on
them. Could water enough be found? New plans to pen up floods of water
were prepared, and immense sums were spent in carrying out these plans.
Enormous dams of cemented stone were thrown across the gorges in the
foothills of the mountains. Behind these solid dams the water from the
rains and the melting snow of the mountains was backed for miles, and
was at once ready to change barrenness into fruitfulness. The stored
water is led by means of main canals and cross ditches wherever it is
needed, and countless acres have been brought under cultivation.
Water is generally applied either by making furrows for its passage
through the fields or by flooding the land. The latter plan is the
cheaper, but it can be used only on level lands. Where the land is
somewhat irregular a checking system, as it is called, is used to
distribute the water. It is taken from check to check until the entire
field has been irrigated.
[Illustration: FIG. 288. THE PROCESS OF IRRIGATING CORN]
The furrow method is usually employed for fruits and for farm and garden
crops. In many places the grass and grain crops are now supplied with
water by furrows instead of by flooding.
Irrigated lands should be carefully and thoroughly tilled. The water for
irrigation is costly, and should be made to go as far as possible. Good
tillage saves the water. Moreover, all cultivated crops like corn,
potatoes, and orchard and truck crops ought to be cultivated frequently
to save the moisture, to keep the soil in fit condition, and to aid the
bacteria in the soil. It was a wise farmer who said, "One does not need
to grow crops many years in order to learn that nothing can take the
place of stirring the soil."
METHODS OF IRRIGATING CROPS
_Tree fruits._ Water is conducted through very narrow furrows from three
to five feet apart, and allowed to sink about four feet deep, and to
spread under the ground. Then the supply is cut off. The object is to
wet the soil deeply, and then by tillage to hold the moisture in the
soil.
_Small fruits._ The common practice is to run water on each side of the
row until the rows are soaked.
_Potatoes._ A thorough soaking is given the land before planting-time,
and then no more than is absolutely necessary until blossoming-time.
After the blossoms appear keep the soil moist until the crop ripens.
_Garden crops._ Any method may be employed, but the vital point is to
cultivate the ground as early as it can be worked after it has been
irrigated.
_Meadows and alfalfa._ Flooding is the most common method in use. The
first irrigation comes early in the spring before growth has advanced
much, and the successive waterings after the harvesting of each crop.
SECTION LXX. LIFE IN THE COUNTRY
As ours is a country in which the people rule, every boy and every girl
ought to be trained to take a wide-awake interest in public affairs.
This training cannot begin too early in life. A wise old man once said,
"In a republic you ought to begin to train a child for good citizenship
on the day of its birth."
[Illustration: FIG. 289. BEAUTY FROM FLOWERS AND GRASS]
[Illustration: FIG. 290. A COUNTRY ROAD IN MECKLENBURG COUNTY,
NORTH CAROLINA]
Happy would it be for our nation if all the young people who live in the
country could begin their training in good citizenship by becoming
workers for these four things:
First, attractive country homes.
Second, attractive country schoolhouses and school grounds.
Third, good country schools.
Fourth, good roads.
If the thousands on thousands of pupils in our schools would become
active workers for these things and continue their work through life,
then, in less than half a century, life in the country would be an
unending delight.
One of the problems of our day is how to keep bright, thoughtful,
sociable, ambitious boys and girls contented on the farm. Every step
taken to make the country home more attractive, to make the school and
its grounds more enjoyable, to make the way easy to the homes of
neighbors, to school, to post-office, and to church, is a step taken
toward keeping on the farm the very boys and girls who are most apt to
succeed there.
Not every man who lives in the country can have a showy or costly home,
but as long as grass and flowers and vines and trees grow, any man who
wishes can have an attractive house. Not every woman who is to spend a
lifetime at the head of a rural home can have a luxuriously furnished
home, but any woman who is willing to take a little trouble can have a
cozy, tastefully furnished home--a home fitted with the conveniences
that diminish household drudgery. Even in this day of cheap literature,
all parents cannot fill their children's home with papers, magazines,
and books, but by means of school and Sunday-school libraries, by means
of circulating book clubs, and by a little self-denial, earnest parents
can feed hungry minds just as they feed hungry bodies.
[Illustration: THE QUEEN OF FLOWERS FOR THE HOME]
[Illustration: FIG. 291. AN ATTRACTIVE COUNTRY HOME]
Agricultural papers that arouse the interest and quicken the thought of
farm boys by discussing the best, easiest, and cheapest ways of farming;
journals full of dainty suggestions for household adornment and comfort;
illustrated papers and magazines that amuse and cheer every member of
the family; books that rest tired bodies and open and strengthen growing
minds--all of these are so cheap that the money reserved from the sale
of one hog will keep a family fairly supplied for a year.
[Illustration: FIG. 292. AN UNIMPROVED SCHOOLHOUSE]
[Illustration: FIG. 293. AN IMPROVED SCHOOLHOUSE]
[Illustration: FIG. 294. THE SAME ROAD AFTER AND BEFORE IMPROVEMENT]
If the parents, teachers, and pupils of a school join hands, an
unsightly, ill-furnished, ill-lighted, and ill-ventilated school-house
can at small cost be changed into one of comfort and beauty. In many
places pupils have persuaded their parents to form clubs to beautify the
school grounds. Each father sends a man or a man with a plow once or
twice a year to work a day on the grounds. Stumps are removed, trees
trimmed, drains put in, grass sowed, flowers, shrubbery, vines, and
trees planted, and the grounds tastefully laid off. Thus at scarcely
noticeable money cost a rough and unsightly school ground gives place to
a charming school yard. Cannot the pupils in every school in which this
book is studied get their parents to form such a club, and make their
school ground a silent teacher of neatness and beauty?
[Illustration: FIG. 295. WASHINGTON'S COUNTRY HOME]
Life in the country will never be as attractive as it ought to be until
all the roads are improved. Winter-washed roads, penning young people
in their own homes for many months each year and destroying so many of
the innocent pleasures of youth, build towns and cities out of the wreck
of country homes. Can young people who love their country and their
country homes engage in a nobler crusade than a crusade for improved
highways?
APPENDIX
SPRAYING MIXTURES
FOR BITING INSECTS
DRY PARIS GREEN
Paris green 1 lb.
Lime or flour 4 to 16 lb.
WET PARIS GREEN
Paris green 1/4 to 2 lb.
Lime 1/4 to 1/2 lb.
Water 50 gal.
FOR SOFT-BODIED SUCKING INSECTS
KEROSENE EMULSION
Hard soap (in fine shavings) 1/2 lb.
Soft water 1 gal.
Kerosene 2 gal.
Dissolve soap in boiling water, add kerosene to the hot water, churn
with spraying pump for at least ten minutes, until the mixture changes
to a creamy, then to a soft, butterlike, mass. This gives three gallons
of 66-per-cent oil emulsion, which may be diluted to the strength
desired. To get 15-per-cent oil emulsion add ten and one-half gallons of
water.
FOR FUNGOUS DISEASES
COPPER SULPHATE
Copper sulphate 1 lb.
Water 18 to 25 gal.
Use only before foliage opens, to kill wintering spores.
BORDEAUX MIXTURE
Copper sulphate (bluestone) 4 to 5 lb.
Lime (good, unslaked) 5 to 6 lb.
Water 50 gal.
Dissolve the copper sulphate (bluestone) in twenty-five gallons of
water. Slake the lime slowly so as to get a smooth, thick cream. Never
cover the lime with too much water. After thorough slaking add
twenty-five gallons of water. When the lime and the bluestone have
dissolved, pour the two liquids into a third vessel. Be sure that each
stream mixes with the other before either enters the vessel. Strain
through a coarse cloth.
Mix fresh for each time. Use for molds and fungi generally. Apply in
fine spray with a good nozzle.
BORDEAUX-PARIS-GREEN MIXTURE
Ordinary Bordeaux mixture 50 gal.
Paris green 4 oz. to 2 lb.
Use for both fungi and insects on apple, potato, etc.
BORDEAUX-ARSENATE-OF-LEAD MIXTURE
Arsenate of lead 2 to 3 lb.
Used for fungous and insect enemies of the potato, and of the apple when
bitter rot is troublesome.
COMMERCIAL LIME-SULPHUR ARSENATE OF LEAD
Commercial lime-sulphur 1-1/2 gal.
Water 50 gal.
Use for spraying apples.
AMMONIACAL COPPER CARBONATE
Copper carbonate 5 oz.
Ammonia (26 deg. Baume) about 3 pt.
Water 50 gal.
Dissolve the copper carbonate in the smallest possible amount of
ammonia. This solution may be kept in stock and diluted to the proper
strength as needed.
Use this instead of the Bordeaux mixture after the fruit has reached
half or two thirds of the mature size. It leaves no spots as does the
lime-sulphur wash or the Bordeaux mixture.
SPRAYS FOR BOTH FUNGOUS AND INSECT PESTS
HOME-MADE LIME-SULPHUR WASH
Lime 20 lb.
Sulphur 15 lb.
Water 50 gal.
The lime, the sulphur, and about half of the water required are boiled
together for forty-five minutes in a kettle over a fire, or in a barrel
or other suitable tank by steam, strained, and then diluted to 50
gallons. This is the wash regularly used against the San Jose scale. It
may be substituted for Bordeaux mixture when spraying trees in the
dormant state. Commercial lime-sulphur may also be used in place of this
homemade wash. Use one gallon of the commercial lime-sulphur to nine
gallons of water in the dormant season.
SELF-BOILED LIME-SULPHUR WASH
The self-boiled lime-sulphur wash is a combination of lime and sulphur
boiled only by the heat of the slaking lime, and is used chiefly for
summer spraying on peaches, plums, cherries, etc. as a substitute for
the Bordeaux mixture.
Lime 8 lb.
Sulphur 6 to 8 lb.
Water 50 gal.
The lime should be placed in a barrel and enough water poured on it to
start it slaking and to keep the sulphur off the bottom of the barrel.
The sulphur, which should first be worked through a sieve to break up
the lumps, may then be added, and, finally, enough water to slake the
lime into a paste. Considerable stirring is necessary to prevent caking
on the bottom. After the violent boiling which accompanies the slaking
of the lime is over, the mixture should be diluted ready for use, or at
least enough cold water added to stop the cooking. From five to fifteen
minutes are required for the process. If the hot mass is permitted to
stand undiluted as a thick paste, a liquid is produced that is injurious
to peach foliage and, in some cases, to apple foliage.
The mixture should be strained through a sieve of twenty meshes to the
inch in order to remove the coarse particles of lime, but all the
sulphur should be worked through the strainer.
GLOSSARY
To enable young readers to understand the technical words necessarily
used in the text only popular definitions are given.
=Abdomen=: the part of an insect lying behind the thorax.
=Acid=: a chemical name given to many sour substances. Vinegar and lemon
juice owe their sour taste to the acid in them.
=Adult=: a person, animal, or plant grown to full size and strength.
=Ammonia= (_ammonium_): a compound of nitrogen readily usable as a plant
food. It is one of the products of decay.
=Annual=: a plant that bears seed during the first year of its existence
and then dies.
=Anther=: the part of a stamen that bears the pollen.
=Atmospheric nitrogen=: nitrogen in the air. Great quantities of this
valuable plant food are in the air; but, strange to say, most plants
cannot use it directly from the air, but must take it in other forms, as
nitrates, etc. The legumes are an exception, as they can use atmospheric
nitrogen.
=Available plant food=: food in such condition that plants can use it.
=Bacteria=: a name applied to a number of kinds of very small living
beings, some beneficial, some harmful, some disease-producing. They
average about one twenty-thousandth of an inch in length.
=Balanced ration=: a ration made up of the proper amounts of
carbohydrates, fats, and protein, as explained in text. Such a ration
avoids all waste of food.
=Biennial=: a plant that produces seed during the second year of its
existence and then dies.
=Blight=: a diseased condition in plants in which the whole or a part of
a plant withers or dries up.
=Bluestone=: a chemical; copper sulphate. It is used to kill fungi,
etc.
=Bordeaux Mixture=: a mixture invented in Bordeaux, France, to destroy
disease-producing fungi.
=Bud= (noun): an undeveloped branch.
=Bud= (verb): to insert a bud from the scion upon the stock to insure
better fruit.
=Bud variation=: occasionally one bud on a plant will produce a branch
differing in some ways from the rest of the branches; this is bud
variation. The shoot that is produced by bud variation is called a
_sport_.
=Calyx=: the outermost row of leaves in a flower.
=Cambium=: the growing layer lying between the wood and the bark.
=Canon=: the shank bone above the fetlock in the fore and hind legs of a
horse.
=Carbohydrates=: carbohydrates are foods free from nitrogen. They make
up the largest part of all vegetables. Examples are sugar, starch, and
cellulose.
=Carbolic acid=: a chemical often used to kill or prevent the growth of
germs, bacteria, fungi, etc.
=Carbon=: a chemical element. Charcoal is nearly pure carbon.
=Carbon disulphide=: a chemical used to kill insects.
=Carbonic acid gas=: a gas consisting of carbon and oxygen. It is
produced by breathing, and whenever carbon is burned. It is the source
of the carbon in plants.
=Cereal=: the name given to grasses that are raised for the food
contained in their seeds, such as corn, wheat, rice.
=Cobalt=: a poisonous chemical used to kill insects.
=Cocoon=: the case made by an insect to contain its larva or pupa.
=Commercial fertilizer=: an enriching plant food bought to improve soil.
=Compact=: a soil is said to be compact when the particles are closely
packed.
=Concentrated=: when applied to food the word means that it contains
much feeding value in small bulk.
=Contagious=: a disease is said to be contagious when it can be spread
or carried from one individual to another.
=Cross=: the result of breeding two varieties of plant together.
=Cross pollination=: the pollination of a flower by pollen brought from
a flower on some other plant.
=Croup=: the top of the hips.
=Culture=: the art of preparing ground for seed and raising crops by
tillage.
=Curb disease=: a swelling on the back part of the hind leg of a horse
just behind the lowest part of the hock joint. It generally causes
lameness.
=Curculio=: a kind of beetle or weevil.
=Dendrolene=: a patented substance used for catching cankerworms.
=Digestion=: the act by which food is prepared by the juices of the body
to be used by the blood.
=Dormant=: a word used to describe sleeping or resting bodies,--bodies
not in a state of activity.
=Drainage=: the process by which an excess of water is removed from the
land by ditches, terraces, or tiles.
=Element=: a substance that cannot be divided into simpler substances.
=Ensilage=: green foods preserved in a silo.
=Evaporate=: to pass off in vapor, as a fluid often does; to change from
a solid or liquid state into vapor, usually by heat.
=Exhaustion=: the state in which strength, power, and force have been
lost. When applied to land, the word means that land has lost its power
to produce well.
=Fermentation=: a chemical change produced by bacteria, yeast, etc. A
common example of fermentation is the change of cider into vinegar.
=Fertility=: the state of being fruitful. Land is said to be fertile
when it produces well.
=Fertilization=: the act which follows pollination and enables a flower
to produce seed.
=Fetlock=: the long-haired cushion on the back side of a horse's leg
just above the hoof.
=Fiber=: any fine, slender thread or threadlike substance, as the
rootlets of plants or the lint of cotton.
=Filter=: to purify a liquid, as water, by causing it to pass through
some substance, as paper, cloth, screens, etc.
=Formalin=: a forty per cent solution of a chemical known as
formaldehyde. Formalin is used to kill fungi, bacteria, etc.
=Formula=: a recipe for the making of a compound; for example,
fertilizer or spraying compounds.
=Fungicide=: a substance used to kill or prevent the growth of fungi;
for example, Bordeaux Mixture or copper sulphate.
=Fungous=: belonging to or caused by fungi.
=Fungus= (plural =fungi=): a low kind of plant life lacking in green
color. Molds and toadstools are examples.
=Germ=: that from which anything springs. The term is often applied to
any very small organism or living thing, particularly if it causes great
effects such as disease, fermentation, etc.
=Germinate=: to sprout. A seed germinates when it begins to grow.
=Girdle=: to make a cut or groove around a limb or tree.
=Glacier=: an immense field or stream of ice formed in the region of
constant snow and moving slowly down a slope or valley.
=Globule=: a small particle of matter shaped like a globe.
=Glucose=: a kind of sugar very common in plants. The sugar from grapes,
honey, etc. is glucose. That from the sugar cane is not.
=Gluten=: a vegetable form of protein found in cereals.
=Graft=: to place a living branch or stem on another living stem so that
it may grow there. It insures the growth of the desired kind of plant.
=Granule=: a little grain.
=Gypsum=: land plaster.
"=Head back=": to cut or prune a tree so as to form its head, that is,
the place where the main trunk first gives off its branches.
=Heredity=: the resemblance of offspring to parent.
=Hibernating=: to pass the winter in a torpid or inactive state in close
quarters.
=Hock=: the joint in the hind leg of quadrupeds between the leg and the
shank. It corresponds to the ankle in man.
=Host=: the plant upon which a fungus or insect is preying.
=Humus=: the portion of the soil caused by the decay of animal or
vegetable matter.
=Hybrid=: the result of breeding two different kinds of plants together.
=Hydrogen=: a chemical element. It is present in water and in all living
things.
=Individual=: a single person, plant, animal, or thing of any kind.
=Inoculate=: to give a disease by inserting the germ that causes it in a
healthy being.
=Insectivorous=: anything that eats insects.
=Kainit=: salts of potash used in making fertilizers.
=Kernel=: a single seed or grain, as a kernel of corn.
=Kerosene emulsion=: see Appendix.
=Larva= (plural =larvae=): the young or immature form of an insect.
=Larval=: belonging to larva.
=Layer=: to propagate plants by a method similar to cutting, but
differing from cutting in that the young plant takes root before it is
separated from the parent plant.
=Legume=: a plant belonging to the family of the pea, clover, and bean;
that is, having a flower of similar structure.
=Lichen=: a kind of flowerless plant that grows on stones, trees,
boards, etc.
=Loam=: an earthy mixture of clay and sand with organic matter.
=Magnesia=: an earthy white substance somewhat similar to lime.
=Magnify=: to make a thing larger in fact or in appearance; to enlarge
the appearance of a thing so that the parts may be seen more easily.
=Membrane=: a thin layer or fold of animal or vegetable matter.
=Mildew=: a cobwebby growth of fungi on diseased or decaying things.
=Mold=: see mildew.
=Mulch=: a covering of straw, leaves, or like substances over the roots
of plants to protect them from heat, drought, etc., and to preserve
moisture.
=Nectar=: a sweetish substance in blossoms of flowers from which bees
make honey.
=Nitrate=: a readily usable form of nitrogen. The most common nitrate is
saltpeter.
=Nitrogen=: a chemical element, one of the most important and most
expensive plant foods. It exists in fertilizers, in ammonia, in
nitrates, and in organic matter.
=Nodule=: a little knot or bump.
=Nutrient=: any substance which nourishes or promotes growth.
=Organic matter=: substances made through the growth of plants or
animals.
=Ovary=: the particular part of the pistil that bears the immature
seed.
=Ovipositor=: the organ with which an insect deposits its eggs.
=Oxygen=: a gas present in the air and necessary to breathing.
=Particle=: any very small part of a body.
=Perennial=: living through several years. All trees are perennial.
=Petal=: a single leaf of the corolla.
=Phosphoric acid=: an important plant food occurring in bones and rock
phosphates.
=Pistil=: the part of the blossom that contains the immature seeds.
=Pollen=: the powdery substance borne by the stamen of the flower. It is
necessary to seed production.
=Pollination=: the act of carrying pollen from stamens to pistils. It is
usually done by the wind or by insects.
=Porosity=: the state of having small openings or passages between the
particles of matter.
=Potash=: an important part of plant foods. The chief source of potash
is kainit, muriate of potash, sulphate of potash, wood ashes, and
cotton-hull ashes.
=Propagate=: to cause plants or animals to increase in number.
=Protein=: the name of a group of substances containing nitrogen. It is
one of the most important of feeding stuffs.
=Pruning=: trimming or cutting parts that are not needed or that are
injurious.
=Pulverize=: to reduce to a dustlike state.
=Pupa=: an insect in the stage of its life that comes just before the
adult condition.
=Purity= (of seed): seeds are pure when they contain only one kind of
seed and no foreign matter.
=Ration=: a fixed daily allowance of food for an animal.
=Raupenleim=: a patented sticky substance used to catch the cankerworm.
=Resistant=: a plant is resistant to disease when it can ward off
attacks of the disease; for example, some varieties of the grape are
resistant to the phylloxera.
=Rotation= (of crops): a well-arranged succession of different crops on
the same land.
=Scion=: a shoot, sprout, or branch taken to graft or bud upon another
plant.
=Seed bed=: the layer of earth in which seeds are sown.
=Seed selection=: the careful selection of seed from particular plants
with the object of keeping or increasing some desirable quality.
=Seedling=: a young plant just from the seed.
=Sepal=: one of the leaves in the calyx.
=Set=: a young plant for propagation.
=Silo=: a house or pit for packing away green food for winter use so as
to exclude air and moisture.
=Sire=: father.
=Smut=: a disease of plants, particularly of cereals, which causes the
plant or some part of it to become a powdery mass.
=Spike=: a lengthened flower cluster with stalkless flowers.
=Spiracle=: an air opening in the body of an insect.
=Spore=: a small body formed by a fungus to reproduce the fungus. It
serves the same use as seeds do for flowering plants.
=Spray=: to apply a liquid in the form of a very fine mist by the aid of
a spraying pump for the purpose of killing fungi or insects.
=Stamen=: the part of the flower that bears the pollen.
=Stamina=: endurance.
=Sterilize=: to destroy all the germs or spores in or on anything.
Sterilizing is often done by heat or chemicals.
=Stigma=: the part of the pistil that receives the pollen.
=Stock=: the stem or main part of a tree or plant. In grafting or
budding the scion is inserted upon the stock.
=Stover=: as used in this book the word means the dry stalks of corn
from which the ears have been removed.
=Subsoil=: the soil under the topsoil.
=Sulphur=: a yellowish chemical element; brimstone.
=Taproot=: the main root of a plant, which runs directly down into the
earth to a considerable depth without dividing.
=Terrace=: a ridge of earth run on a level around a slope or hillside to
keep the land from washing.
=Thorax=: the middle part of the body of an insect. The thorax lies
between the abdomen and the head.
=Thermometer=: an instrument for measuring heat.
=Tillage=: the act of preparing land for seed, and keeping the ground in
a proper state for the growth of crops.
=Transplant=: a plant grown in a bed with a view to being removed to
other soil; a technical term used by gardeners.
=Tubercle=: a small, wart-like growth on the roots of legumes.
=Udder=: the milk vessel of a cow.
=Utensil=: a vessel used for household purposes.
=Variety=: a particular kind. For example, the Winesap, Bonum, AEsop,
etc., are different varieties of apples.
=Ventilate=: to open to the free passage of air.
=Virgin soil=: a soil which has never been cultivated.
=Vitality= (of seed): vitality is the ability to grow. Seed are of good
vitality if a large per cent of them will sprout.
=Weathering=: the action of moisture, air, frost, etc. upon rocks.
=Weed=: a plant out of place. A wheat plant in a rose bed or a rose in
the wheat field would be regarded as a weed, as would any plant growing
in a place in which it is not wanted.
=Wilt= (of cotton): a disease of cotton in which the whole plant droops
or wilts.
=Withers=: the ridge between the shoulder bones of a horse, at the base
of the neck.
=Yeast=: a preparation containing the yeast plant used to make bread
rise, etc.
INDEX
Acid phosphate, 23, 214, 225
Alfalfa, 28, 179, 187, 242, 244, 245, 246-248
Alfalfa root, 28
Animals, domestic, 261-292
why we feed, 290
Annual, 69, 112, 118, 260
Ant, 144, 150
Anther, 43
Apple, 42, 59, 76, 78, 83-85, 123
fire-blight of, 130
Apple-tree tent caterpillar, 161, 162
Arsenate of lead, 156, 157
Ashes, 207
Asparagus, 98
Babcock milk-tester, 304
Bacteria, 24, 127, 128, 129, 131, 133
Balanced ration, 294-295
Barley, 215-217
Beans, 95, 98
Bee, 286-290
Beehive, anti-robbing entrance of, 289
Beet, 95, 96
sugar-, 218-221
Beet sugar, 218
Beetle, 146, 148
cucumber, 102
potato, 170
Biennials, 70
Bird homes, 322
Birds, 318-323
Black knot, 140
Blackberry, 59
Blight, 106
eggplant, 103
pear and apple, 130
potato, 138, 209
tomato, 106
Bordeaux mixture, 127, 141, 142, 156, 209
Borer, peach, 163, 164
Breeding-cage, insect, 152
Buckwheat, 229-230
Bud variation, 58
Budding, 55, 81-82
Buds, 51, 59
Bug, 147
Bulbs, 109, 110, 111
Burbank, Luther, 80
Butter, 297, 300
Butterfly, 146, 148, 149
Cabbage, 93, 95, 96, 99
Cabbage worm, 165, 166
Caladium, 111
Cambium, 79, 131
Cankerworm, 159, 160
Canna, 116
Cantaloupes, 101
Cape jasmine, 110
Capillarity, 10
Carbohydrates, 291, 292, 295
Carbon, 39, 40, 291
Carbon disulphide, 169
Carbonic acid gas, 6, 317
Caterpillar, 147, 149, 161
Cattle, 270-275
beef type of, 272
dairy type of, 273
improving of, 274
Cauliflower, 91, 140
Celery, 100, 101
Cherries, 59, 81, 164
Chinch bug, 165, 167
Churn, the, 297, 299, 300
Churning, 299
Cleft grafting, 80
Clover, 187, 249-251
Club root, 140
Cocoon, 147, 148, 150, 151
Codling moth, 154, 156, 164
Cold-frame, 93-97, 101
Colostrum, 297
Consumption, germ of, 129
Corms, 111
Corn, 197-202
blossom of, 45
freezing of seed, 75
roots of, 27, 28
selection of seed, 66, 67, 68
Cotton, 180-188
resistant variety of, 132
Sea Island, 132, 182
short-stapled, 182
Cotton wilt, 142
Cotton-boll weevil, 173
Cotton-seed meal, 24, 225, 295
Cow
Aberdeen Angus, 272
Galloway, 274
Holstein, 275
Jersey, 273
care of, 296
the dairy, 293-296
Cowpeas, 251-254
Cream, 297, 298
Crop-rotation, 33-37
Crops, 178-237
rotation of, 20, 33, 189, 211, 217, 219, 228
value of, per acre, 179
Cross section, 26
Crosses, 49
Cross-pollination, 48
Cucumber, 73, 101
Cucumber beetle, 102
Curculio, plum, 156
Currant, 59
Cuttings, 52, 53, 54, 55, 109
Cyclamen, 115
Dahlia, 111, 112, 116
Dairy rules, 301
Dairying, 297-301
Dendrolene, 160
Diphtheria, germ of, 129
Diseases of plants, 122-143
Domestic animals, 261-292
Drainage, benefits of, 15
Dry farming, 323-326
Ducks, 282
Eggplants, 102, 103
Ensilage, 295
Farm crops, 178-237
Farm garden, 235-237
Farm tools, 313-315
Farming on dry lands, 323-330
Fats, 291, 292, 295
Feed stuffs, 238-260
digestible nutrients in, 290-292
growing, on the farm, 309-313
Feeding animals, 290
reasons for, 290, 292
Fertilization, 45
Fertilizers, 22-24
Field insects, 144-177
Figs, 51, 59
Fire-blight, 130
Flax, 226-229
Flea-beetle, 169, 172, 209
Floriculture, 89, 108
Flower, the, 42, 43
Flower box, 112
Flower gardening, 108-121
Fly, 146, 150
Formalin, 135, 136, 138
Fowls, 282-286
Fruit mold, 126, 142
Fruit rot, 122
Fruit tree, how to raise a, 76-87
Fultz, Abraham, 65
Fungi, 125, 126, 127
Garden, 235-237
Garden insects, 165-177
Gardening, market-, 89-90
Geese, 284
Geranium, 52, 54, 109, 110
Germs, 24, 127, 129, 131, 135;
_see also_ Bacteria
Girdler, 162
Girdling, 41
Glacier, 3, 4, 5
Gladiolus, 92, 111
Gooseberries, 59
Grafting, 55, 78-81
cleft, 80
root, 79
time for, 79
tongue, 79, 80
Grafting wax, 79
Grape, 51, 53, 58, 59
Grape cutting, 54
Grape phylloxera, 157, 158
Grape pollination, 52, 53
Grasses, 238-244
Grasshopper, 148, 151
Greenhouse, 91-94
Heading back, 83
Hemp, 226-229
Hens, 282-286
Heredity, 67
Hessian fly, 170
Homes, country, 330-337
Honey dew, 167
Horse, 262-270
diagrams by which to judge, 265-269
Percheron, 264
proportions of, 270
roadster, 267
Horticulture, 89-121
Host, 126
Hotbed, 91-97
How to raise a fruit tree, 76-87
Humus, 5, 20, 21, 22, 193, 207
Husker and shredder, 201
Hybrids, 49, 50, 51, 183
Insects, cage for breeding, 152
classes of, 146
eggs of, 150
eyes of, 145
field, 144, 165
garden, 144-177
general, 144
how they feed, 146, 147
orchard, 144
parts of, 145
Irish, or white, potato, 206-209
propagation of, 56, 57
Irrigation, 326-330
method of, 330
Kafir corn, 325, 326
Kainite, 214
Kerosene emulsion, 168
Land, improvement of, 17, 21, 31, 34, 244
Landscape-gardening, 89
Larva, 147, 148
Layering, 55, 57
Legumes, 31, 207, 244-260
Lettuce, 91, 93, 95
Life in the country, 330-337
Lime, 140
Lime-sulphur wash, 141, 142, 153, 154, 156
Liming land, 315-318
Louse, plant, 150, 151, 152, 167
Machines, farm, 313-315
Maize, 197
Manures, 20, 21-24
Maple sugar, 217
Market-gardening, 89, 90
Meadows, 240, 242
Melons, 101, 106
Mildew, 124
how to prevent, 126
Milk, 297
sours, how, 302
Milk-tester, Babcock, 304
Mineral matter, 291, 292
Moisture, 9
Mold, 123, 124, 125
Moonflower, 115
Morning-glory, 115
Moth, 148
codling, 154, 156, 164
mosquito, 150
Mulch, 12
Narcissus, 114
Nectar, 46, 47
Nitrate of soda, 24, 99, 211, 214
Nitrogen, 15, 23, 24, 31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 188, 246
Nitrogen-gathering crops, 15, 18, 244-260
Nodules, 36
Oats, 209-215
Oat smut, 134
Onion, 103, 104
Orchard insects, 143
Osmosis, 30
Ovary, 44
Ovipositor, 157
Paris green, 165, 209
Parsnips, 94
Pasture grasses, 238-244
Peach, 42, 59, 81, 84, 85, 87, 141, 142
Peach curl, 141, 143
Peach mold, 142
Peach mummies, 142
Peach tree, how made, 86-87
Peach-tree borer, 163, 164
Peanuts, 202-203
Pear, 44, 49, 59, 81, 130
Pear fire-blight, 130
Peas, 95, 104, 251-254
Perennials, 71, 112, 116, 118, 260
Petal, 43
Phosphoric acid, 23, 24, 186, 188, 196, 216, 244, 254
Phylloxera, 157, 158
Pipette, 305
Pistil, 43, 44
Plant, the, 25, 39
Plant disease, cause of, 122
nature of, 122
prevention of, 122, 129
Plant food, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24
from air, 39
from soil, 29
kinds of, 33
Plant louse, 150, 152, 167, 168
Plant seeding, 59, 109
Planting a tree, 76-87
Plant-propagation, 51-59
by buds, 51
Plants grown from seed, 109
from bulbs, 109
Plow, right way to, 11
Plum curculio, 156, 157
Plums, 43, 59, 81, 164
Pollen, 43, 47, 48
Pollination, 45-48
by hand, 49
cross-, 49, 50
grape, 52, 53
Potash, 23, 24, 186, 188, 196, 207, 216, 244, 246, 254
Potato, sweet, 204, 205
white, or Irish, 56, 57, 206-209
Potato beetle, 170, 209
Potato blight, 138, 209
Potato scab, 136, 205, 209
Potato seed, 56, 57
Poultry, 282-286
Prevention of plant diseases, 129, 130
Propagation of plants by buds, 58
by cuttings, 52
Protein, 212, 291, 294, 295, 297
Pruning, 83, 84-87
root, 85, 86
Pupa, 147, 150, 151
Purity of seed, 72-75
Pyrethrum powder, 165
Quince, 59
Radish, 95
Raspberry, 59
Ration, balanced, 294, 295
Ratoon, 225
Red raspberry, 59
Rice, 231-232
Roads, 332, 337
Root-hairs, 24, 25, 27, 29, 32
Root-pruning, 86
Roots, 25, 26, 27, 28
Root-tubercles, 30, 37
Rose, 109, 121, 124
Rot of fruit, 122
Rotation of crops, 8, 20, 21, 33-37, 189, 211, 217, 219, 258
Rye, 213-215
San Jose scale, 152, 153
Sap current, the, 40
Scab, 136, 209
Schoolhouses, 334
Scion, 79, 81, 82
Seed, 42
Seed purity, 72-75
Seed vitality, 72-75
Seed-germination, 74
Seed-germinator, 74
Seeding, 60, 114
Seed-selection, 56, 62, 64, 66
in the field, 56, 62, 68
of corn, 66
of cotton, 60, 61
of potatoes, 56, 57
of wheat, 64, 65
Seed-selection plat, 63, 64
Selection of seed. _See_ Seed-selection
Sepal, 43
Sheep, 276-279
Silo, 295
Smuts, 134, 135
Soil, 1
bacteria in, 24
deepening of, 8
definition of, 1
drainage of, 14
Soil, how formed, 2, 3
how water rises in, 13
improving, 17
manuring of, 21
moisture of, 9
origin of, 1
particles of, magnified, 10
and plant, 25
retention of water by, 12
tillage of, 6
virgin, 17, 18
Sowing seed, 94
Soy beans, 256-260
Spiders, red, 121
Spiracles, 145
Spores, 123, 124, 125, 130, 135
prevention of, 130
Spraying, 137, 138, 139, 155, 156, 157, 209
Spraying outfit, 138, 155, 168, 171
Squanto, 21
Squash, 45, 95
Squash bug, 168
Stamen, 43-48
Starch, 40
Starchy food, 291
Stigma, 44-45
Stock, 79, 82
Strawberry, 45, 55, 59, 90
Style, 43
Subsoil, 1
Subsoiling, 10
Sugar, 40
Sugar plants, 217
Sugar-beet, 218-221
Sugar-cane, 221
Sugar-maple, 217
Sulphate of ammonia, 211
Sun-scald, 84
Sweet pea, 114, 115
Sweet potato, 56, 57, 111, 204-205
Swine, 279-282
Tent caterpillar, 162
Tile drain, 15, 16
benefits of, 14
Tillage, 6-9, 19, 28, 200
Timber, 232-235
enemies of, 233
Tobacco, 189-192
Tobacco worm, 170, 172
Tomato, 40, 105
Tongue grafting, 79, 80
Tools, 313
Topping tobacco, 191
Trap plant, 168
Tree, manuring of, 26
Truck crops, 98-107
Tubercle, 30, 32
Tull, Jethro, 6
Turkeys, 282
Turnip, 95
Twig girdler, 162
Typhoid fever, germ of, 129
Vetches, 255-257
Vitality of seed, 72-75
Vitamines, 298
Wasp, 146
Water, 10
absorption of, by plants, 10
retention of, by soil, 9
rise of, in soil, 13
saved by plants, 10
saved by soils, 12
Watermelons, 106
Wax, 79
Weathering, 4, 7
Weeds, 69, 74
annual, 69
biennial, 70
perennial, 71
Weevil, 169
cotton-boll, 173-177
plum, 156
Wheat, 192-197
selection of seed, 63
yield of, 64
Why feed animals, 290
Wilt
cotton, 142
watermelon, 107
Window box, 118
Window-garden, 119-121
Window-gardening, 119
Worn-out land, reclaiming of, 19, 244
Yeast, 127, 128

Pollination is the transfer of pollen from an anther of a plant to the stigma of a plant, later enabling fertilisation and the production of seeds. Pollinating agents can be animals such as insects, for example bees, beetles or butterflies; birds, and bats; water; wind; and even plants themselves. Pollinating animals travel from plant to plant carrying pollen on their bodies in a vital interaction that allows the transfer of genetic material critical to the reproductive system of most flowering plants. Self-pollination occurs within a closed flower. Pollination often occurs within a species. When pollination occurs between species, it can produce hybrid offspring in nature and in plant breeding work.
In angiosperms, after the pollen grain (gametophyte) has landed on the stigma, it germinates and develops a pollen tube which grows down the style until it reaches an ovary. Its two gametes travel down the tube to where the gametophyte(s) containing the female gametes are held within the carpel. After entering an ovule through the micropyle, one male nucleus fuses with the polar bodies to produce the endosperm tissues, while the other fuses with the egg cell to produce the embryo. Hence the term: "double fertilisation". This process would result in the production of a seed, made of both nutritious tissues and embryo.
In gymnosperms, the ovule is not contained in a carpel, but exposed on the surface of a dedicated support organ, such as the scale of a cone, so that the penetration of carpel tissue is unnecessary. Details of the process vary according to the division of gymnosperms in question. Two main modes of fertilisation are found in gymnosperms: cycads and Ginkgo have motile sperm that swim directly to the egg inside the ovule, whereas conifers and gnetophytes have sperm that are unable to swim but are conveyed to the egg along a pollen tube.
Pollination research covers various fields, including botany, horticulture, entomology, and ecology. The pollination process as an interaction between flower and pollen vector was first addressed in the 18th century by Christian Konrad Sprengel. It is important in horticulture and agriculture, because fruiting is dependent on fertilisation: the result of pollination. The study of pollination by insects is known as anthecology. There are also studies in economics that look at the positives and negatives of pollination, focused on bees, and how the process affects the pollinators themselves.
== Process of pollination ==
Pollen germination has three stages; hydration, activation and pollen tube emergence. The pollen grain is severely dehydrated so that its mass is reduced, enabling it to be more easily transported from flower to flower. Germination only takes place after rehydration, ensuring that premature germination does not take place in the anther. Hydration allows the plasma membrane of the pollen grain to reform into its normal bilayer organization providing an effective osmotic membrane. Activation involves the development of actin filaments throughout the cytoplasm of the cell, which eventually become concentrated at the point from which the pollen tube will emerge. Hydration and activation continue as the pollen tube begins to grow.
In conifers, the reproductive structures are borne on cones. The cones are either pollen cones (male) or ovulate cones (female), but some species are monoecious and others dioecious. A pollen cone contains hundreds of microsporangia carried on (or borne on) reproductive structures called sporophylls. Spore mother cells in the microsporangia divide by meiosis to form haploid microspores that develop further by two mitotic divisions into immature male gametophytes (pollen grains). The four resulting cells consist of a large tube cell that forms the pollen tube, a generative cell that will produce two sperm by mitosis, and two prothallial cells that degenerate. These cells comprise a very reduced microgametophyte, that is contained within the resistant.
The pollen grains are dispersed by the wind to the female, ovulate cone that is made up of many overlapping scales (sporophylls, and thus megasporophylls), each protecting two ovules, each of which consists of a megasporangium (the nucellus) wrapped in two layers of tissue, the integument and the cupule, that were derived from highly modified branches of ancestral gymnosperms. When a pollen grain lands close enough to the tip of an ovule, it is drawn in through the micropyle ( a pore in the integuments covering the tip of the ovule) often by means of a drop of liquid known as a pollination drop. The pollen enters a pollen chamber close to the nucellus, and there it may wait for a year before it germinates and forms a pollen tube that grows through the wall of the megasporangium (=nucellus) where fertilisation takes place. During this time, the megaspore mother cell divides by meiosis to form four haploid cells, three of which degenerate. The surviving one develops as a megaspore and divides repeatedly to form an immature female gametophyte (egg sac). Two or three archegonia containing an egg then develop inside the gametophyte. Meanwhile, in the spring of the second year two sperm cells are produced by mitosis of the body cell of the male gametophyte. The pollen tube elongates and pierces and grows through the megasporangium wall and delivers the sperm cells to the female gametophyte inside. Fertilisation takes place when the nucleus of one of the sperm cells enters the egg cell in the megagametophyte's archegonium.
In flowering plants, the anthers of the flower produce microspores by meiosis. These undergo mitosis to form male gametophytes, each of which contains two haploid cells. Meanwhile, the ovules produce megaspores by meiosis, further division of these form the female gametophytes, which are very strongly reduced, each consisting only of a few cells, one of which is the egg. When a pollen grain adheres to the stigma of a carpel it germinates, developing a pollen tube that grows through the tissues of the style, entering the ovule through the micropyle. When the tube reaches the egg sac, two sperm cells pass through it into the female gametophyte and fertilisation takes place.
== Methods ==
Pollination may be biotic or abiotic. Biotic pollination relies on living pollinators to move the pollen from one flower to another. Abiotic pollination relies on wind, water or even rain. Adding natural habitat areas into farm systems generally improves pollination, as farms that are closer to natural habitat have higher crop yield because they are visited by more pollinators. Non-native plants can be equally as effective as native plants at attracting bees as pollinators, however they do tend to attract different types of bees, namely more generalist species.
=== Biotic pollination ===
About 80% of angiosperms rely on biotic pollination. (also called pollen vectors): organisms that carry or move the pollen grains from the anther of one flower to the receptive part of the carpel or pistil (stigma) of another. Between 100,000 and 200,000 species of animal act as pollinators of the world's 250,000 species of flowering plant. The majority of these pollinators are insects, but about 1,500 species of birds and mammals visit flowers and may transfer pollen between them. Besides birds and bats which are the most frequent visitors, these include monkeys, lemurs, squirrels, rodents and possums.
Entomophily, pollination by insects, often occurs on plants that have developed colored petals and a strong scent to attract insects such as bees, wasps, and occasionally ants (Hymenoptera), beetles (Coleoptera), moths and butterflies (Lepidoptera), and flies (Diptera). The existence of insect pollination dates back to the dinosaur era.
Insect pollinators such as honey bees (Apis spp.),
bumblebees (Bombus spp.), and butterflies (e.g., Thymelicus flavus) have been observed to engage in flower constancy, which means they are more likely to transfer pollen to other conspecific plants. This can be beneficial for the pollinators, as flower constancy prevents the loss of pollen during interspecific flights and pollinators from clogging stigmas with pollen of other flower species. It also improves the probability that the pollinator will find productive flowers easily accessible and recognisable by familiar clues. The primary insect pollinators are hymenopterans, mostly bees, but also including sawflies, ants, and many species of wasps.
Many flowers attract pollinators by odor. For example, orchid bee species such as Euglossa cordata are attracted to orchids this way, and it has been suggested that some orchid species intoxicate bees during visits which can last up to 90 minutes. However, in general, plants that rely on pollen vectors tend to be adapted to their particular type of vector, for example day-pollinated species tend to be brightly coloured and have little odor, but if they are pollinated largely by birds or specialist mammals, they tend to be larger and have larger nectar rewards than species that are strictly insect-pollinated. Night-blooming flowers have little color, but are often very aromatic. Plants with vertebrate pollinators also tend to spread their rewards over longer periods, having long flowering seasons; their specialist pollinators would be likely to starve if the pollination season were too short.
Some flowers have specialized mechanisms to trap pollinators to increase effectiveness, attach pollen to specific body parts (as happens in many orchid and Asclepias species), or require specialized behaviors or morphology in order to extract pollen or nectar. One such syndrome is "buzz pollination" (or "sonication"), where a bee must vibrate at a certain frequency in order to cause pollen to be released from the anthers.
In zoophily, pollination is performed by vertebrates such as birds and bats, particularly, hummingbirds, sunbirds, spiderhunters, honeyeaters, and fruit bats. Ornithophily or bird pollination is the pollination of flowering plants by birds. Chiropterophily or bat pollination is the pollination of flowering plants by bats. Plants adapted to use bats or moths as pollinators typically have white petals, strong scent and flower at night, whereas plants that use birds as pollinators tend to produce copious nectar and have red petals.
Mammals are not generally thought of as pollinators, but some rodents, bats and marsupials are significant pollinators and some even specialise in such activities. In South Africa certain species of Protea (in particular Protea humiflora, P. amplexicaulis, P. subulifolia, P. decurrens and P. cordata) are adapted to pollination by rodents (particularly Cape Spiny Mouse, Acomys subspinosus) and elephant shrews (Elephantulus species). The flowers are borne near the ground, are yeasty smelling, not colourful, and sunbirds reject the nectar with its high xylose content. The mice apparently can digest the xylose and they eat large quantities of the pollen. In Australia pollination by flying, gliding and earthbound mammals has been demonstrated.
Reptile pollinators are known, but they form a minority in most ecological situations. They are most frequent and most ecologically significant in island systems, where insect and sometimes also bird populations may be unstable and less species-rich. Adaptation to a lack of animal food and of predation pressure, might therefore favour reptiles becoming more herbivorous and more inclined to feed on pollen and nectar. Most species of lizards in the families that seem to be significant in pollination seem to carry pollen only incidentally, especially the larger species such as Varanidae and Iguanidae, but especially several species of the Gekkonidae are active pollinators, and so is at least one species of the Lacertidae, Podarcis lilfordi, which pollinates various species, but in particular is the major pollinator of Euphorbia dendroides on various Mediterranean islands.
=== Abiotic pollination ===
Abiotic pollination uses nonliving methods such as wind and water to move pollen from one flower to another. This allows the plant to spend energy directly on pollen rather than on attracting pollinators with flowers and nectar. Pollination by wind is more common amongst abiotic pollination.
==== By wind ====
Some 98% of abiotic pollination is anemophily, i.e., pollination by wind. This probably arose from insect pollination (entomophily), most likely due to changes in the environment or the availability of pollinators. The transfer of pollen is more efficient than previously thought; wind pollinated plants have developed to have specific heights, in addition to specific floral, stamen and stigma positions that promote effective pollen dispersal and transfer.
==== By water ====
Pollination by water, hydrophily, uses water to transport pollen, sometimes as whole anthers; these can travel across the surface of the water to carry dry pollen from one flower to another. In Vallisneria spiralis, an unopened male flower floats to the surface of the water, and, upon reaching the surface, opens up and the fertile anthers project forward. The female flower, also floating, has its stigma protected from the water, while its sepals are slightly depressed into the water, allowing the male flowers to tumble in.
==== By rain ====
Rain pollination is used by a small percentage of plants. Heavy rain discourages insect pollination and damages unprotected flowers, but can itself disperse pollen of suitably adapted plants, such as Ranunculus flammula, Narthecium ossifragum, and Caltha palustris. In these plants, excess rain drains allowing the floating pollen to come in contact with the stigma. In some orchids ombrophily occurs, and rain water splashes cause the anther cap to be removed, allowing for the pollen to be exposed. After exposure, raindrops causes the pollen to be shot upward, when the stipe pulls them back, and then fall into the cavity of the stigma. Thus, for the orchid Acampe rigida, this allows the plant to self-pollinate, which is useful when biotic pollinators in the environment have decreased.
==== Switching methods ====
It is possible for a plant to have varying pollination methods, including both biotic and abiotic pollination. The orchid Oeceoclades maculata uses both rain and butterflies, depending on its environmental conditions.
== Mechanism ==
Pollination can be accomplished by cross-pollination or by self-pollination:
Cross-pollination, also called allogamy, occurs when pollen is delivered from the stamen of one flower to the stigma of a flower on another plant of the same species. Plants adapted for cross-pollination have several mechanisms to prevent self-pollination; the reproductive organs may be arranged in such a way that self-fertilisation is unlikely, or the stamens and carpels may mature at different times.
Self-pollination occurs when pollen from one flower pollinates the same flower or other flowers of the same individual. It is thought to have evolved under conditions when pollinators were not reliable vectors for pollen transport, and is most often seen in short-lived annual species and plants that colonize new locations. Self-pollination may include autogamy, where pollen is transferred from anther (male part) to the stigma (female part) of the same flower; or geitonogamy, when pollen is transferred from anther of a flower to stigma of another flower on the same plant. Plants adapted to self-fertilize often have similar stamen and carpel lengths. Plants that can pollinate themselves and produce viable offspring are called self-fertile. Plants that cannot fertilize themselves are called self-sterile, a condition which mandates cross-pollination for the production of offspring.
Cleistogamy: is self-pollination that occurs before the flower opens. The pollen is released from the anther within the flower or the pollen on the anther grows a tube down the style to the ovules. It is a type of sexual breeding, in contrast to asexual systems such as apomixis. Some cleistogamous flowers never open, in contrast to chasmogamous flowers that open and are then pollinated. Cleistogamous flowers are by necessity found on self-compatible or self-fertile plants. Although certain orchids and grasses are entirely cleistogamous, other plants resort to this strategy under adverse conditions. Often there may be a mixture of both cleistogamous and chasmogamous flowers, sometimes on different parts of the plant and sometimes in mixed inflorescences. The ground bean produces cleistogamous flowers below ground, and mixed cleistogamous and chasmogamous flowers above.
An estimated 48.7% of plant species are either dioecious or self-incompatible obligate out-crossers. It is also estimated that about 42% of flowering plants have a mixed mating system in nature. In the most common kind of mixed mating system, individual plants produce a single type of flower and fruits may contain self-pollinated, out-crossed or a mixture of progeny types.
Pollination also requires consideration of pollenizers, the plants that serve as the pollen source for other plants. Some plants are self-compatible (self-fertile) and can pollinate and fertilize themselves. Other plants have chemical or physical barriers to self-pollination.
In agriculture and horticulture pollination management, a good pollenizer is a plant that provides compatible, viable and plentiful pollen and blooms at the same time as the plant that is to be pollinated or has pollen that can be stored and used when needed to pollinate the desired flowers. Hybridization is effective pollination between flowers of different species, or between different breeding lines or populations. see also Heterosis.
Peaches are considered self-fertile because a commercial crop can be produced without cross-pollination, though cross-pollination usually gives a better crop. Apples are considered self-incompatible, because a commercial crop must be cross-pollinated. Many commercial fruit tree varieties are grafted clones, genetically identical. An orchard block of apples of one variety is genetically a single plant. Many growers now consider this a mistake. One means of correcting this mistake is to graft a limb of an appropriate pollenizer (generally a variety of crabapple) every six trees or so.
== Coevolution ==
The first fossil record for abiotic pollination is from fern-like plants in the late Carboniferous period. Gymnosperms show evidence for biotic pollination as early as the Triassic period. Many fossilized pollen grains show characteristics similar to the biotically dispersed pollen today. Furthermore, the gut contents, wing structures, and mouthpart morphology of fossilized beetles and flies suggest that they acted as early pollinators. The association between beetles and angiosperms during the early Cretaceous period led to parallel radiations of angiosperms and insects into the late Cretaceous. The evolution of nectaries in late Cretaceous flowers signals the beginning of the mutualism between hymenopterans and angiosperms.
Bees provide a good example of the mutualism that exists between hymenopterans and angiosperms. Flowers provide bees with nectar (an energy source) and pollen (a source of protein). When bees go from flower to flower collecting pollen they are also depositing pollen grains onto the flowers, thus pollinating them. While pollen and nectar, in most cases, are the most notable reward attained from flowers, bees also visit flowers for other resources such as oil, fragrance, resin and even waxes. It has been estimated that bees originated with the origin or diversification of angiosperms. In addition, cases of coevolution between bee species and flowering plants have been illustrated by specialized adaptations. For example, long legs are selected for in Rediviva neliana, a bee that collects oil from Diascia capsularis, which have long spur lengths that are selected for in order to deposit pollen on the oil-collecting bee, which in turn selects for even longer legs in R. neliana and again longer spur length in D. capsularis is selected for, thus, continually driving each other's evolution.
== In agriculture ==
The most essential staple food crops on the planet, like wheat, maize, rice, soybeans and sorghum are wind pollinated or self pollinating. When considering the top 15 crops contributing to the human diet globally in 2013, slightly over 10% of the total human diet of plant crops (211 out of 1916 kcal/person/day) is dependent upon insect pollination.
Pollination management is a branch of agriculture that seeks to protect and enhance present pollinators and often involves the culture and addition of pollinators in monoculture situations, such as commercial fruit orchards. The largest managed pollination event in the world is in California almond orchards, where nearly half (about one million hives) of the US honey bees are trucked to the almond orchards each spring. New York's apple crop requires about 30,000 hives; Maine's blueberry crop uses about 50,000 hives each year. The US solution to the pollinator shortage, so far, has been for commercial beekeepers to become pollination contractors and to migrate. Just as the combine harvesters follow the wheat harvest from Texas to Manitoba, beekeepers follow the bloom from south to north, to provide pollination for many different crops.
In America, bees are brought to commercial plantings of cucumbers, squash, melons, strawberries, and many other crops. Honey bees are not the only managed pollinators: a few other species of bees are also raised as pollinators. The alfalfa leafcutter bee is an important pollinator for alfalfa seed in western United States and Canada. Bumblebees are increasingly raised and used extensively for greenhouse tomatoes and other crops.
The ecological and financial importance of natural pollination by insects to agricultural crops, improving their quality and quantity, becomes more and more appreciated and has given rise to new financial opportunities. The vicinity of a forest or wild grasslands with native pollinators near agricultural crops, such as apples, almonds or coffee can improve their yield by about 20%. The benefits of native pollinators may result in forest owners demanding payment for their contribution in the improved crop results – a simple example of the economic value of ecological services. Farmers can also raise native crops in order to promote native bee pollinator species as shown with the native sweat bees L. vierecki in Delaware and L. leucozonium in southwest Virginia.
The American Institute of Biological Sciences reports that native insect pollination saves the United States agricultural economy nearly an estimated $3.1 billion annually through natural crop production; pollination produces some $40 billion worth of products annually in the United States alone.
Pollination of food crops has become an environmental issue, due to two trends. The trend to monoculture means that greater concentrations of pollinators are needed at bloom time than ever before, yet the area is forage poor or even deadly to bees for the rest of the season. The other trend is the decline of pollinator populations, due to pesticide misuse and overuse, new diseases and parasites of bees, clearcut logging, decline of beekeeping, suburban development, removal of hedges and other habitat from farms, and public concern about bees. Widespread aerial spraying for mosquitoes due to West Nile fears is causing an acceleration of the loss of pollinators. Changes in land use, harmful pesticides, and advancing climate change threaten wild pollinators, key insect species that increase yields of three-fourths of crop varieties and are critical to growing healthy foods.
In some situations, farmers or horticulturists may aim to restrict natural pollination to only permit breeding with the preferred individuals plants. This may be achieved through the use of pollination bags.
=== Improving pollination in areas with suboptimal bee densities ===
In some instances growers' demand for beehives far exceeds the available supply. The number of managed beehives in the US has steadily declined from close to 6 million after WWII, to less than 2.5 million today. In contrast, the area dedicated to growing bee-pollinated crops has grown over 300% in the same time period. Additionally, in the past five years there has been a decline in winter managed beehives, which has reached an unprecedented rate of colony losses at near 30%. At present, there is an enormous demand for beehive rentals that cannot always be met. There is a clear need across the agricultural industry for a management tool to draw pollinators into cultivations and encourage them to preferentially visit and pollinate the flowering crop. By attracting pollinators like honey bees and increasing their foraging behavior, particularly in the center of large plots, we can increase grower returns and optimize yield from their plantings. ISCA Technologies, from Riverside, California, created a semiochemical formulation called SPLAT Bloom, that modifies the behavior of honey bees, inciting them to visit flowers in every portion of the field.
== Environmental impacts ==
Loss of pollinators, also known as pollinator decline (of which colony collapse disorder is perhaps the most well known) has been noticed in recent years. These loss of pollinators have caused a disturbance in early plant regeneration processes such as seed dispersal and pollination. Early processes of plant regeneration greatly depend on plant-animal interactions and because these interactions are interrupted, biodiversity and ecosystem functioning are threatened. Pollination by animals aids in the genetic variability and diversity within plants because it allows for out-crossing instead for self-crossing. Without this genetic diversity there would be a lack of traits for natural selection to act on for the survival of the plant species. Seed dispersal is also important for plant fitness because it allows plants the ability to expand their populations. More than that, it permits plants to escape environments that have changed and have become difficult to reside in. All of these factors show the importance of pollinators for plants, which are a significant part of the foundation for a stable ecosystem. If only a few species of plants depended on Loss of pollinators is especially devastating because there are so many plant species rely on them. More than 87.5% of angiosperms, over 75% of tropical tree species, and 30–40% of tree species in temperate regions depend on pollination and seed dispersal.
Factors that contribute to pollinator decline include habitat destruction, pesticide, parasitism/diseases, and climate change. The more destructive forms of human disturbances are land use changes such as fragmentation, selective logging, and the conversion to secondary forest habitat. Defaunation of frugivores is also an important driver. These alterations are especially harmful due to the sensitivity of the pollination process of plants. Research on tropical palms found that defaunation has caused a decline in seed dispersal, which causes a decrease in genetic variability in this species. Habitat destruction such as fragmentation and selective logging remove areas that are most optimal for the different types of pollinators, which removes pollinators food resources, nesting sites, and leads to isolation of populations. The effect of pesticides on pollinators has been debated because it is difficult to determine that a single pesticide is the cause as opposed to a mixture or other threats. Whether exposure alone causes damage, or if the duration and potency are also factors is unknown. However, insecticides have negative effects, as in the case of neonicotinoids that harm bee colonies. Many researchers believe it is the synergistic effects of these factors which are ultimately detrimental to pollinator populations.
In the agriculture industry, climate change is causing a "pollinator crisis". This crisis is affecting the production of crops, and the relating costs, due to a decrease in pollination processes. This disturbance can be phenological or spatial. In the first case, species that normally occur in similar seasons or time cycles, now have different responses to environmental changes and therefore no longer interact. For example, a tree may flower sooner than usual, while the pollinator may reproduce later in the year and therefore the two species no longer coincide in time. Spatial disturbances occur when two species that would normally share the same distribution now respond differently to climate change and are shifting to different regions.
=== Examples of affected pollinators ===
The most known and understood pollinator, bees, have been used as the prime example of the decline in pollinators. Bees are essential in the pollination of agricultural crops and wild plants and are one of the main insects that perform this task. Out of the bees species, the honey bee or Apis mellifera has been studied the most and in the United States, there has been a loss of 59% of colonies from 1947 to 2005. The decrease in populations of the honey bee have been attributed to pesticides, genetically modified crops, fragmentation, parasites and diseases that have been introduced. There has been a focus on neonicotinoids effects on honey bee populations. Neonicotinoids insecticides have been used due to its low mammalian toxicity, target specificity, low application rates, and broad spectrum activity. However, the insecticides are able to make its way throughout the plant, which includes the pollen and nectar. Due to this, it has been shown to effect on the nervous system and colony relations in the honey bee populations.
Butterflies too have suffered due to these modifications. Butterflies are helpful ecological indicators since they are sensitive to changes within the environment like the season, altitude, and above all, human impact on the environment. Butterfly populations were higher within the natural forest and were lower in open land. The reason for the difference in density is the fact that in open land the butterflies would be exposed to desiccation and predation. These open regions are caused by habitat destruction like logging for timber, livestock grazing, and firewood collection. Due to this destruction, butterfly species' diversity can decrease and it is known that there is a correlation in butterfly diversity and plant diversity.
=== Food security and pollinator decline ===
Besides the imbalance of the ecosystem caused by the decline in pollinators, it may jeopardise food security. Pollination is necessary for plants to continue their populations and 3/4 of the plant species that contribute to the world's food supply are plants that require pollinators. Insect pollinators, like bees, are large contributors to crop production, over 200 billion dollars' worth of crop species are pollinated by these insects. Pollinators are also essential because they improve crop quality and increase genetic diversity, which is necessary in producing fruit with nutritional value and various flavors. Crops that do not depend on animals for pollination but on the wind or self-pollination, like corn and potatoes, have doubled in production and make up a large part of the human diet but do not provide the micronutrients that are needed. The essential nutrients that are necessary in the human diet are present in plants that rely on animal pollinators. There have been issues in vitamin and mineral deficiencies and it is believed that if pollinator populations continue to decrease these deficiencies will become even more prominent.
== Plant–pollinator networks ==
Wild pollinators often visit a large number of plant species and plants are visited by a large number of pollinator species. All these relations together form a network of interactions between plants and pollinators. Surprising similarities were found in the structure of networks consisting out of the interactions between plants and pollinators. This structure was found to be similar in very different ecosystems on different continents, consisting of entirely different species.
The structure of plant-pollinator networks may have large consequences for the way in which pollinator communities respond to increasingly harsh conditions. Mathematical models, examining the consequences of this network structure for the stability of pollinator communities suggest that the specific way in which plant-pollinator networks are organized minimizes competition between pollinators and may even lead to strong indirect facilitation between pollinators when conditions are harsh. This means that pollinator species together can survive under harsh conditions. But it also means that pollinator species collapse simultaneously when conditions pass a critical point. This simultaneous collapse occurs, because pollinator species depend on each other when surviving under difficult conditions.
Such a community-wide collapse, involving many pollinator species, can occur suddenly when increasingly harsh conditions pass a critical point and recovery from such a collapse might not be easy. The improvement in conditions needed for pollinators to recover, could be substantially larger than the improvement needed to return to conditions at which the pollinator community collapsed.
== Economics of commercial honeybee pollination ==
While there are 200,000 – 350,000 different species of animals that help pollination, honeybees are responsible for majority of the pollination for consumed crops, providing between $235 and $577 US billion of benefits to global food production. The western honey bee (Apis mellifera L.) provides highly valued pollination services for a wide variety of agricultural crops, and ranks as the most frequent single species of pollinator for crops worldwide. Since the early 1900s, beekeepers in the United States started renting out their colonies to farmers to increase the farmer's crop yields, earning additional revenue from providing privatized pollination. As of 2016, 41% of an average US beekeeper's revenue comes from providing such pollination service to farmers, making it the biggest proportion of their income, with the rest coming from sales of honey, beeswax, government subsidy, etc. This is an example of how a positive externality, pollination of crops from beekeeping and honey-making, was successfully accounted for and incorporated into the overall market for agriculture. On top of assisting food production, pollination service provide beneficial spillovers as bees germinate not only the crops, but also other plants around the area that they are set loose to pollinate, increasing biodiversity for the local ecosystem. There is even further spillover as biodiversity increases ecosystem resistance for wildlife and crops. Due to their role of pollination in crop production, commercial honeybees are considered to be livestock by the US Department of Agriculture. The impact of pollination varies by crop. For example, almond production in the United States, an $11 billion industry based almost exclusively in the state of California, is heavily dependent on imported honeybees for pollination of almond trees. Almond industry uses up to 82% of the services in the pollination market. Each February, around 60% of the all bee colonies in the US are moved to California's Central Valley.
Over the past decade, beekeepers across the US have reported that the mortality rate of their bee colonies has stayed constant at about 30% every year, making the deaths an expected cost of business for the beekeepers. While the exact cause of this phenomenon is unknown, according to the US Department of Agriculture Colony Collapse Disorder Progress Report it can be traced to factors such as pollution, pesticides, and pathogens from evidences found in areas of the colonies affected and the colonies themselves. Pollution and pesticides are detrimental to the health of the bees and their colonies as the bees' ability to pollinate and return to their colonies are great greatly compromised. Moreover, California's Central Valley is determined by the World Health Organization as the location of country's worst air pollution. Almond pollinating bees, approximately 60% of the bees in the US as mentioned above, will be mixed with bees from thousands of other hives provided by different beekeepers, making them exponentially susceptible to diseases and mites that any of them could be carrying. The deaths do not stop at commercial honeybees as there is evidence of significant pathogen spillover to other pollinators including wild bumble bees, infecting up to 35–100% of wild bees within 2 km radius of commercial pollination. The negative externality of private pollination services is the decline of biodiversity through the deaths of commercial and wild bees. Despite losing about a third of their workforce every year, beekeepers continue to rent out their bees to almond farms due to the high pay from the almond industry. In 2016, a colony rented out for almond pollination gave beekeepers an income of $165 per colony rented, around three times from average of other crops that use the pollination rental service. However, a recent study published in Oxford Academic's Journal of Economic Entomology found that once the costs for maintaining bees specifically for almond pollination, including overwintering, summer management, and the replacement dying bees are considered, almond pollination is barely or not profitable for average beekeepers.
== See also ==
Canadian Pollination Initiative
Cheating (biology)
Floral color change
Pollinator-mediated selection
Fruit tree pollination
Hand-pollination
Paul Knuth
Hermann Müller (botanist)
Plant reproductive morphology
Pollen DNA barcoding
Polli:Nation
== References ==
== Notes ==
== Further reading ==
Walker, Timothy (6 October 2020). Pollination: The Enduring Relationship Between Plant and Pollinator. Princeton University Press. pp. 1–224. ISBN 978-0-691-20375-1.
== External links ==
Resources on Pollinators from the National Academies
The Pollination Home page
Pollination in Hydroponics
Pollination syndromes images at bioimages.vanderbilt.edu
"Pollination" . Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

Photosynthesis is a system of biological processes by which photopigment-bearing autotrophic organisms, such as most plants, algae and cyanobacteria, convert light energy—typically from sunlight—into the chemical energy necessary to fuel their metabolism. The term photosynthesis usually refers to oxygenic photosynthesis, a process that releases oxygen as a byproduct of water splitting. Photosynthetic organisms store the converted chemical energy within the bonds of intracellular organic compounds (complex compounds containing carbon), typically carbohydrates like sugars (mainly glucose, fructose and sucrose), starches, phytoglycogen and cellulose. When needing to use this stored energy, an organism's cells then metabolize the organic compounds through cellular respiration. Photosynthesis plays a critical role in producing and maintaining the oxygen content of the Earth's atmosphere, and it supplies most of the biological energy necessary for complex life on Earth.
Some organisms also perform anoxygenic photosynthesis, which does not produce oxygen. Some bacteria (e.g. purple bacteria) use bacteriochlorophyll to split hydrogen sulfide as a reductant instead of water, releasing sulfur instead of oxygen, which was a dominant form of photosynthesis in the euxinic Canfield oceans during the Boring Billion. Archaea such as Halobacterium also perform a type of non-carbon-fixing anoxygenic photosynthesis, where the simpler photopigment retinal and its microbial rhodopsin derivatives are used to absorb green light and produce a proton (hydron) gradient across the cell membrane, and the subsequent ion movement powers transmembrane proton pumps to directly synthesize adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the "energy currency" of cells. Such archaeal photosynthesis might have been the earliest form of photosynthesis that evolved on Earth, as far back as the Paleoarchean, preceding that of cyanobacteria (see Purple Earth hypothesis).
While the details may differ between species, the process always begins when light energy is absorbed by the reaction centers, proteins that contain photosynthetic pigments or chromophores. In plants, these pigments are chlorophylls (a porphyrin derivative that absorbs the red and blue spectra of light, thus reflecting green) held inside chloroplasts, abundant in leaf cells. In cyanobacteria, they are embedded in the plasma membrane. In these light-dependent reactions, some energy is used to strip electrons from suitable substances, such as water, producing oxygen gas. The hydrogen freed by the splitting of water is used in the creation of two important molecules that participate in energetic processes: reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) and ATP.
In plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, sugars are synthesized by a subsequent sequence of light-independent reactions called the Calvin cycle. In this process, atmospheric carbon dioxide is incorporated into already existing organic compounds, such as ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP). Using the ATP and NADPH produced by the light-dependent reactions, the resulting compounds are then reduced and removed to form further carbohydrates, such as glucose. In other bacteria, different mechanisms like the reverse Krebs cycle are used to achieve the same end.
The first photosynthetic organisms probably evolved early in the evolutionary history of life using reducing agents such as hydrogen or hydrogen sulfide, rather than water, as sources of electrons. Cyanobacteria appeared later; the excess oxygen they produced contributed directly to the oxygenation of the Earth, which rendered the evolution of complex life possible. The average rate of energy captured by global photosynthesis is approximately 130 terawatts, which is about eight times the total power consumption of human civilization. Photosynthetic organisms also convert around 100–115 billion tons (91–104 Pg petagrams, or billions of metric tons), of carbon into biomass per year. Photosynthesis was discovered in 1779 by Jan Ingenhousz who showed that plants need light, not just soil and water.
== Overview ==
Most photosynthetic organisms are photoautotrophs, which means that they are able to synthesize food directly from carbon dioxide and water using energy from light. However, not all organisms use carbon dioxide as a source of carbon atoms to carry out photosynthesis; photoheterotrophs use organic compounds, rather than carbon dioxide, as a source of carbon.
In plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, photosynthesis releases oxygen. This oxygenic photosynthesis is by far the most common type of photosynthesis used by living organisms. Some shade-loving plants (sciophytes) produce such low levels of oxygen during photosynthesis that they use all of it themselves instead of releasing it to the atmosphere.
Although there are some differences between oxygenic photosynthesis in plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, the overall process is quite similar in these organisms. There are also many varieties of anoxygenic photosynthesis, used mostly by bacteria, which consume carbon dioxide but do not release oxygen or which produce elemental sulfur instead of molecular oxygen.
Carbon dioxide is converted into sugars in a process called carbon fixation; photosynthesis captures energy from sunlight to convert carbon dioxide into carbohydrates. Carbon fixation is an endothermic redox reaction. In general outline, photosynthesis is the opposite of cellular respiration: while photosynthesis is a process of reduction of carbon dioxide to carbohydrates, cellular respiration is the oxidation of carbohydrates or other nutrients to carbon dioxide. Nutrients used in cellular respiration include carbohydrates, amino acids and fatty acids. These nutrients are oxidized to produce carbon dioxide and water, and to release chemical energy to drive the organism's metabolism.
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are distinct processes, as they take place through different sequences of chemical reactions and in different cellular compartments (cellular respiration in mitochondria).
The general equation for photosynthesis as first proposed by Cornelis van Niel is:
CO2carbondioxide + 2H2Aelectron donor + photonslight energy → [CH2O]carbohydrate + 2Aoxidizedelectrondonor + H2Owater
Since water is used as the electron donor in oxygenic photosynthesis, the equation for this process is:
CO2carbondioxide + 2H2Owater + photonslight energy → [CH2O]carbohydrate + O2oxygen + H2Owater
This equation emphasizes that water is both a reactant in the light-dependent reaction and a product of the light-independent reaction, but canceling n water molecules from each side gives the net equation:
CO2carbondioxide + H2O water + photonslight energy → [CH2O]carbohydrate + O2 oxygen
Other processes substitute other compounds (such as arsenite) for water in the electron-supply role; for example some microbes use sunlight to oxidize arsenite to arsenate: The equation for this reaction is:
CO2carbondioxide + (AsO3−3)arsenite + photonslight energy → (AsO3−4)arsenate + COcarbonmonoxide(used to build other compounds in subsequent reactions)
Photosynthesis occurs in two stages. In the first stage, light-dependent reactions or light reactions capture the energy of light and use it to make the hydrogen carrier NADPH and the energy-storage molecule ATP. During the second stage, the light-independent reactions use these products to capture and reduce carbon dioxide.
Most organisms that use oxygenic photosynthesis use visible light for the light-dependent reactions, although at least three use shortwave infrared or, more specifically, far-red radiation.
Some organisms employ even more radical variants of photosynthesis. Some archaea use a simpler method that employs a pigment similar to those used for vision in animals. The bacteriorhodopsin changes its configuration in response to sunlight, acting as a proton pump. This produces a proton gradient more directly, which is then converted to chemical energy. The process does not involve carbon dioxide fixation and does not release oxygen, and seems to have evolved separately from the more common types of photosynthesis.
== Photosynthetic membranes and organelles ==
In photosynthetic bacteria, the proteins that gather light for photosynthesis are embedded in cell membranes. In its simplest form, this involves the membrane surrounding the cell itself. However, the membrane may be tightly folded into cylindrical sheets called thylakoids, or bunched up into round vesicles called intracytoplasmic membranes. These structures can fill most of the interior of a cell, giving the membrane a very large surface area and therefore increasing the amount of light that the bacteria can absorb.
In plants and algae, photosynthesis takes place in organelles called chloroplasts. A typical plant cell contains about 10 to 100 chloroplasts. The chloroplast is enclosed by a membrane. This membrane is composed of a phospholipid inner membrane, a phospholipid outer membrane, and an intermembrane space. Enclosed by the membrane is an aqueous fluid called the stroma. Embedded within the stroma are stacks of thylakoids (grana), which are the site of photosynthesis. The thylakoids appear as flattened disks. The thylakoid itself is enclosed by the thylakoid membrane, and within the enclosed volume is a lumen or thylakoid space. Embedded in the thylakoid membrane are integral and peripheral membrane protein complexes of the photosynthetic system.
Plants absorb light primarily using the pigment chlorophyll. The green part of the light spectrum is not absorbed but is reflected, which is the reason that most plants have a green color. Besides chlorophyll, plants also use pigments such as carotenes and xanthophylls. Algae also use chlorophyll, but various other pigments are present, such as phycocyanin, carotenes, and xanthophylls in green algae, phycoerythrin in red algae (rhodophytes) and fucoxanthin in brown algae and diatoms resulting in a wide variety of colors.
These pigments are embedded in plants and algae in complexes called antenna proteins. In such proteins, the pigments are arranged to work together. Such a combination of proteins is also called a light-harvesting complex.
Although all cells in the green parts of a plant have chloroplasts, the majority of those are found in specially adapted structures called leaves. Certain species adapted to conditions of strong sunlight and aridity, such as many Euphorbia and cactus species, have their main photosynthetic organs in their stems. The cells in the interior tissues of a leaf, called the mesophyll, can contain between 450,000 and 800,000 chloroplasts for every square millimeter of leaf. The surface of the leaf is coated with a water-resistant waxy cuticle that protects the leaf from excessive evaporation of water and decreases the absorption of ultraviolet or blue light to minimize heating. The transparent epidermis layer allows light to pass through to the palisade mesophyll cells where most of the photosynthesis takes place.
== Light-dependent reactions ==
In the light-dependent reactions, one molecule of the pigment chlorophyll absorbs one photon and loses one electron. This electron is taken up by a modified form of chlorophyll called pheophytin, which passes the electron to a quinone molecule, starting the flow of electrons down an electron transport chain that leads to the ultimate reduction of NADP to NADPH. In addition, this creates a proton gradient (energy gradient) across the chloroplast membrane, which is used by ATP synthase in the synthesis of ATP. The chlorophyll molecule ultimately regains the electron it lost when a water molecule is split in a process called photolysis, which releases oxygen.
The overall equation for the light-dependent reactions under the conditions of non-cyclic electron flow in green plants is:
Not all wavelengths of light can support photosynthesis. The photosynthetic action spectrum depends on the type of accessory pigments present. For example, in green plants, the action spectrum resembles the absorption spectrum for chlorophylls and carotenoids with absorption peaks in violet-blue and red light. In red algae, the action spectrum is blue-green light, which allows these algae to use the blue end of the spectrum to grow in the deeper waters that filter out the longer wavelengths (red light) used by above-ground green plants. The non-absorbed part of the light spectrum is what gives photosynthetic organisms their color (e.g., green plants, red algae, purple bacteria) and is the least effective for photosynthesis in the respective organisms.
=== Z scheme ===
In plants, light-dependent reactions occur in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplasts where they drive the synthesis of ATP and NADPH. The light-dependent reactions are of two forms: cyclic and non-cyclic.
In the non-cyclic reaction, the photons are captured in the light-harvesting antenna complexes of photosystem II by chlorophyll and other accessory pigments (see diagram "Z-scheme"). The absorption of a photon by the antenna complex loosens an electron by a process called photoinduced charge separation. The antenna system is at the core of the chlorophyll molecule of the photosystem II reaction center. That loosened electron is taken up by the primary electron-acceptor molecule, pheophytin. As the electrons are shuttled through an electron transport chain (the so-called Z-scheme shown in the diagram), a chemiosmotic potential is generated by pumping proton cations (H+) across the membrane and into the thylakoid space. An ATP synthase enzyme uses that chemiosmotic potential to make ATP during photophosphorylation, whereas NADPH is a product of the terminal redox reaction in the Z-scheme. The electron enters a chlorophyll molecule in Photosystem I. There it is further excited by the light absorbed by that photosystem. The electron is then passed along a chain of electron acceptors to which it transfers some of its energy. The energy delivered to the electron acceptors is used to move hydrogen ions across the thylakoid membrane into the lumen. The electron is eventually used to reduce the coenzyme NADP with an H+ to NADPH (which has functions in the light-independent reaction); at that point, the path of that electron ends.
The cyclic reaction is similar to that of the non-cyclic but differs in that it generates only ATP, and no reduced NADP (NADPH) is created. The cyclic reaction takes place only at photosystem I. Once the electron is displaced from the photosystem, the electron is passed down the electron acceptor molecules and returns to photosystem I, from where it was emitted, hence the name cyclic reaction.
=== Water photolysis ===
Linear electron transport through a photosystem will leave the reaction center of that photosystem oxidized. Elevating another electron will first require re-reduction of the reaction center. The excited electrons lost from the reaction center (P700) of photosystem I are replaced by transfer from plastocyanin, whose electrons come from electron transport through photosystem II. Photosystem II, as the first step of the Z-scheme, requires an external source of electrons to reduce its oxidized chlorophyll a reaction center. The source of electrons for photosynthesis in green plants and cyanobacteria is water. Two water molecules are oxidized by the energy of four successive charge-separation reactions of photosystem II to yield a molecule of diatomic oxygen and four hydrogen ions. The electrons yielded are transferred to a redox-active tyrosine residue that is oxidized by the energy of P680+. This resets the ability of P680 to absorb another photon and release another photo-dissociated electron. The oxidation of water is catalyzed in photosystem II by a redox-active structure that contains four manganese ions and a calcium ion; this oxygen-evolving complex binds two water molecules and contains the four oxidizing equivalents that are used to drive the water-oxidizing reaction (Kok's S-state diagrams). The hydrogen ions are released in the thylakoid lumen and therefore contribute to the transmembrane chemiosmotic potential that leads to ATP synthesis. Oxygen is a waste product of light-dependent reactions, but the majority of organisms on Earth use oxygen and its energy for cellular respiration, including photosynthetic organisms.
== Light-independent reactions ==
=== Calvin cycle ===
In the light-independent (or "dark") reactions, the enzyme RuBisCO captures CO2 from the atmosphere and, in a process called the Calvin cycle, uses the newly formed NADPH and releases three-carbon sugars, which are later combined to form sucrose and starch. The overall equation for the light-independent reactions in green plants is
Carbon fixation produces the three-carbon sugar intermediate, which is then converted into the final carbohydrate products. The simple carbon sugars photosynthesis produces are then used to form other organic compounds, such as the building material cellulose, the precursors for lipid and amino acid biosynthesis, or as a fuel in cellular respiration. The latter occurs not only in plants but also in animals when the carbon and energy from plants is passed through a food chain.
The fixation or reduction of carbon dioxide is a process in which carbon dioxide combines with a five-carbon sugar, ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate, to yield two molecules of a three-carbon compound, glycerate 3-phosphate, also known as 3-phosphoglycerate. Glycerate 3-phosphate, in the presence of ATP and NADPH produced during the light-dependent stages, is reduced to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. This product is also referred to as 3-phosphoglyceraldehyde (PGAL) or, more generically, as triose phosphate. Most (five out of six molecules) of the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate produced are used to regenerate ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate so the process can continue. The triose phosphates not thus "recycled" often condense to form hexose phosphates, which ultimately yield sucrose, starch, and cellulose, as well as glucose and fructose. The sugars produced during carbon metabolism yield carbon skeletons that can be used for other metabolic reactions like the production of amino acids and lipids.
=== Carbon concentrating mechanisms ===
==== On land ====
In hot and dry conditions, plants close their stomata to prevent water loss. Under these conditions, CO2 will decrease and oxygen gas, produced by the light reactions of photosynthesis, will increase, causing an increase of photorespiration by the oxygenase activity of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) and decrease in carbon fixation. Some plants have evolved mechanisms to increase the CO2 concentration in the leaves under these conditions.
Plants that use the C4 carbon fixation process chemically fix carbon dioxide in the cells of the mesophyll by adding it to the three-carbon molecule phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), a reaction catalyzed by an enzyme called PEP carboxylase, creating the four-carbon organic acid oxaloacetic acid. Oxaloacetic acid or malate synthesized by this process is then translocated to specialized bundle sheath cells where the enzyme RuBisCO and other Calvin cycle enzymes are located, and where CO2 released by decarboxylation of the four-carbon acids is then fixed by RuBisCO activity to the three-carbon 3-phosphoglyceric acids. The physical separation of RuBisCO from the oxygen-generating light reactions reduces photorespiration and increases CO2 fixation and, thus, the photosynthetic capacity of the leaf. C4 plants can produce more sugar than C3 plants in conditions of high light and temperature. Many important crop plants are C4 plants, including maize, sorghum, sugarcane, and millet. Plants that do not use PEP-carboxylase in carbon fixation are called C3 plants because the primary carboxylation reaction, catalyzed by RuBisCO, produces the three-carbon 3-phosphoglyceric acids directly in the Calvin-Benson cycle. Over 90% of plants use C3 carbon fixation, compared to 3% that use C4 carbon fixation; however, the evolution of C4 in over sixty plant lineages makes it a striking example of convergent evolution. C2 photosynthesis, which involves carbon-concentration by selective breakdown of photorespiratory glycine, is both an evolutionary precursor to C4 and a useful carbon-concentrating mechanism in its own right.
Xerophytes, such as cacti and most succulents, also use PEP carboxylase to capture carbon dioxide in a process called Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM). In contrast to C4 metabolism, which spatially separates the CO2 fixation to PEP from the Calvin cycle, CAM temporally separates these two processes. CAM plants have a different leaf anatomy from C3 plants, and fix the CO2 at night, when their stomata are open. CAM plants store the CO2 mostly in the form of malic acid via carboxylation of phosphoenolpyruvate to oxaloacetate, which is then reduced to malate. Decarboxylation of malate during the day releases CO2 inside the leaves, thus allowing carbon fixation to 3-phosphoglycerate by RuBisCO. CAM is used by 16,000 species of plants.
Calcium-oxalate-accumulating plants, such as Amaranthus hybridus and Colobanthus quitensis, show a variation of photosynthesis where calcium oxalate crystals function as dynamic carbon pools, supplying carbon dioxide (CO2) to photosynthetic cells when stomata are partially or totally closed. This process was named alarm photosynthesis. Under stress conditions (e.g., water deficit), oxalate released from calcium oxalate crystals is converted to CO2 by an oxalate oxidase enzyme, and the produced CO2 can support the Calvin cycle reactions. Reactive hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), the byproduct of oxalate oxidase reaction, can be neutralized by catalase. Alarm photosynthesis represents a photosynthetic variant to be added to the well-known C4 and CAM pathways. However, alarm photosynthesis, in contrast to these pathways, operates as a biochemical pump that collects carbon from the organ interior (or from the soil) and not from the atmosphere.
==== In water ====
Cyanobacteria possess carboxysomes, which increase the concentration of CO2 around RuBisCO to increase the rate of photosynthesis. An enzyme, carbonic anhydrase, located within the carboxysome, releases CO2 from dissolved hydrocarbonate ions (HCO−3). Before the CO2 can diffuse out, RuBisCO concentrated within the carboxysome quickly sponges it up. HCO−3 ions are made from CO2 outside the cell by another carbonic anhydrase and are actively pumped into the cell by a membrane protein. They cannot cross the membrane as they are charged, and within the cytosol they turn back into CO2 very slowly without the help of carbonic anhydrase. This causes the HCO−3 ions to accumulate within the cell from where they diffuse into the carboxysomes. Pyrenoids in algae and hornworts also act to concentrate CO2 around RuBisCO.
== Order and kinetics ==
The overall process of photosynthesis takes place in four stages:
== Efficiency ==
Plants usually convert light into chemical energy with a photosynthetic efficiency of 3–6%.
Absorbed light that is unconverted is dissipated primarily as heat, with a small fraction (1–2%) reemitted as chlorophyll fluorescence at longer (redder) wavelengths. This fact allows measurement of the light reaction of photosynthesis by using chlorophyll fluorometers.
Actual plants' photosynthetic efficiency varies with the frequency of the light being converted, light intensity, temperature, and proportion of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and can vary from 0.1% to 8%. By comparison, solar panels convert light into electric energy at an efficiency of approximately 6–20% for mass-produced panels, and above 40% in laboratory devices.
Scientists are studying photosynthesis in hopes of developing plants with increased yield.
The efficiency of both light and dark reactions can be measured, but the relationship between the two can be complex. For example, the light reaction creates ATP and NADPH energy molecules, which C3 plants can use for carbon fixation or photorespiration. Electrons may also flow to other electron sinks. For this reason, it is not uncommon for authors to differentiate between work done under non-photorespiratory conditions and under photorespiratory conditions.
Chlorophyll fluorescence of photosystem II can measure the light reaction, and infrared gas analyzers can measure the dark reaction. An integrated chlorophyll fluorometer and gas exchange system can investigate both light and dark reactions when researchers use the two separate systems together. Infrared gas analyzers and some moisture sensors are sensitive enough to measure the photosynthetic assimilation of CO2 and of ΔH2O using reliable methods. CO2 is commonly measured in μmols/(m2/s), parts per million, or volume per million; and H2O is commonly measured in mmols/(m2/s) or in mbars. By measuring CO2 assimilation, ΔH2O, leaf temperature, barometric pressure, leaf area, and photosynthetically active radiation (PAR), it becomes possible to estimate, "A" or carbon assimilation, "E" or transpiration, "gs" or stomatal conductance, and "Ci" or intracellular CO2. However, it is more common to use chlorophyll fluorescence for plant stress measurement, where appropriate, because the most commonly used parameters FV/FM and Y(II) or F/FM' can be measured in a few seconds, allowing the investigation of larger plant populations.
Gas exchange systems that offer control of CO2 levels, above and below ambient, allow the common practice of measurement of A/Ci curves, at different CO2 levels, to characterize a plant's photosynthetic response.
Integrated chlorophyll fluorometer – gas exchange systems allow a more precise measure of photosynthetic response and mechanisms. While standard gas exchange photosynthesis systems can measure Ci, or substomatal CO2 levels, the addition of integrated chlorophyll fluorescence measurements allows a more precise measurement of CC, the estimation of CO2 concentration at the site of carboxylation in the chloroplast, to replace Ci. CO2 concentration in the chloroplast becomes possible to estimate with the measurement of mesophyll conductance or gm using an integrated system.
Photosynthesis measurement systems are not designed to directly measure the amount of light the leaf absorbs, but analysis of chlorophyll fluorescence, P700- and P515-absorbance, and gas exchange measurements reveal detailed information about, e.g., the photosystems, quantum efficiency and the CO2 assimilation rates. With some instruments, even wavelength dependency of the photosynthetic efficiency can be analyzed.
A phenomenon known as quantum walk increases the efficiency of the energy transport of light significantly. In the photosynthetic cell of an alga, bacterium, or plant, there are light-sensitive molecules called chromophores arranged in an antenna-shaped structure called a photocomplex. When a photon is absorbed by a chromophore, it is converted into a quasiparticle referred to as an exciton, which jumps from chromophore to chromophore towards the reaction center of the photocomplex, a collection of molecules that traps its energy in a chemical form accessible to the cell's metabolism. The exciton's wave properties enable it to cover a wider area and try out several possible paths simultaneously, allowing it to instantaneously "choose" the most efficient route, where it will have the highest probability of arriving at its destination in the minimum possible time.
Because that quantum walking takes place at temperatures far higher than quantum phenomena usually occur, it is only possible over very short distances. Obstacles in the form of destructive interference cause the particle to lose its wave properties for an instant before it regains them once again after it is freed from its locked position through a classic "hop". The movement of the electron towards the photo center is therefore covered in a series of conventional hops and quantum walks.
== Evolution ==
Fossils of what are thought to be filamentous photosynthetic organisms have been dated at 3.4 billion years old. More recent studies also suggest that photosynthesis may have begun about 3.4 billion years ago, though the first direct evidence of photosynthesis comes from thylakoid membranes preserved in 1.75-billion-year-old cherts.
Oxygenic photosynthesis is the main source of oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere, and its earliest appearance is sometimes referred to as the oxygen catastrophe. Geological evidence suggests that oxygenic photosynthesis, such as that in cyanobacteria, became important during the Paleoproterozoic era around two billion years ago. Modern photosynthesis in plants and most photosynthetic prokaryotes is oxygenic, using water as an electron donor, which is oxidized to molecular oxygen in the photosynthetic reaction center.
=== Symbiosis and the origin of chloroplasts ===
Several groups of animals have formed symbiotic relationships with photosynthetic algae. These are most common in corals, sponges, and sea anemones. Scientists presume that this is due to the particularly simple body plans and large surface areas of these animals compared to their volumes. In addition, a few marine mollusks, such as Elysia viridis and Elysia chlorotica, also maintain a symbiotic relationship with chloroplasts they capture from the algae in their diet and then store in their bodies (see Kleptoplasty). This allows the mollusks to survive solely by photosynthesis for several months at a time. Some of the genes from the plant cell nucleus have even been transferred to the slugs, so that the chloroplasts can be supplied with proteins they need to survive.
An even closer form of symbiosis may explain the origin of chloroplasts. Chloroplasts have many similarities with photosynthetic bacteria, including a circular chromosome, prokaryotic-type ribosome, and similar proteins in the photosynthetic reaction center. The endosymbiotic theory suggests that photosynthetic bacteria were acquired (by endocytosis) by early eukaryotic cells to form the first plant cells. Therefore, chloroplasts may be photosynthetic bacteria that adapted to life inside plant cells. Like mitochondria, chloroplasts possess their own DNA, separate from the nuclear DNA of their plant host cells and the genes in this chloroplast DNA resemble those found in cyanobacteria. DNA in chloroplasts codes for redox proteins such as those found in the photosynthetic reaction centers. The CoRR Hypothesis proposes that this co-location of genes with their gene products is required for redox regulation of gene expression, and accounts for the persistence of DNA in bioenergetic organelles.
=== Photosynthetic eukaryotic lineages ===
Symbiotic and kleptoplastic organisms excluded:
The glaucophytes and the red and green algae—clade Archaeplastida (uni- and multicellular)
The cryptophytes—clade Cryptista (unicellular)
The haptophytes—clade Haptista (unicellular)
The dinoflagellates and chromerids in the superphylum Myzozoa, and Pseudoblepharisma in the phylum Ciliophora—clade Alveolata (unicellular)
The ochrophytes—clade Stramenopila (uni- and multicellular)
The chlorarachniophytes and three species of Paulinella in the phylum Cercozoa—clade Rhizaria (unicellular)
The euglenids—clade Excavata (unicellular)
Except for the euglenids, which are found within the Excavata, all of these belong to the Diaphoretickes. Archaeplastida and the photosynthetic Paulinella got their plastids, which are surrounded by two membranes, through primary endosymbiosis in two separate events, by engulfing a cyanobacterium. The plastids in all the other groups have either a red or green algal origin, and are referred to as the "red lineages" and the "green lineages". The only known exception is the ciliate Pseudoblepharisma tenue, which in addition to its plastids that originated from green algae also has a purple sulfur bacterium as a symbiont. In dinoflagellates and euglenids the plastids are surrounded by three membranes, and in the remaining lines by four. A nucleomorph, remnants of the original algal nucleus located between the inner and outer membranes of the plastid, is present in the cryptophytes (from a red alga) and chlorarachniophytes (from a green alga).
Some dinoflagellates that lost their photosynthetic ability later regained it through new endosymbiotic events with different algae.
While able to perform photosynthesis, many of these eukaryotic groups are mixotrophs and practice heterotrophy to various degrees.
=== Photosynthetic prokaryotic lineages ===
Early photosynthetic systems, such as those in green and purple sulfur and green and purple nonsulfur bacteria, are thought to have been anoxygenic, and used various other molecules than water as electron donors. Green and purple sulfur bacteria are thought to have used hydrogen and sulfur as electron donors. Green nonsulfur bacteria used various amino and other organic acids as electron donors. Purple nonsulfur bacteria used a variety of nonspecific organic molecules. The use of these molecules is consistent with the geological evidence that Earth's early atmosphere was highly reducing at that time.
With a possible exception of Heimdallarchaeota, photosynthesis is not found in archaea. Haloarchaea are photoheterotrophic; they can absorb energy from the sun, but do not harvest carbon from the atmosphere and are therefore not photosynthetic. Instead of chlorophyll they use rhodopsins, which convert light-energy to ion gradients but cannot mediate electron transfer reactions.
In bacteria eight photosynthetic lineages are currently known:
Cyanobacteria, the only prokaryotes performing oxygenic photosynthesis and the only prokaryotes that contain two types of photosystems (type I (RCI), also known as Fe-S type, and type II (RCII), also known as quinone type). The seven remaining prokaryotes have anoxygenic photosynthesis and use versions of either type I or type II.
Chlorobi (green sulfur bacteria) Type I
Heliobacteria Type I
Chloracidobacterium Type I
Proteobacteria (purple sulfur bacteria and purple non-sulfur bacteria) Type II (see: Purple bacteria)
Chloroflexota (green non-sulfur bacteria) Type II
Gemmatimonadota Type II
Eremiobacterota Type II
=== Cyanobacteria and the evolution of photosynthesis ===
The biochemical capacity to use water as the source for electrons in photosynthesis evolved once, in a common ancestor of extant cyanobacteria (formerly called blue-green algae). The geological record indicates that this transforming event took place early in Earth's history, at least 2450–2320 million years ago (Ma), and, it is speculated, much earlier. Because the Earth's atmosphere contained almost no oxygen during the estimated development of photosynthesis, it is believed that the first photosynthetic cyanobacteria did not generate oxygen. Available evidence from geobiological studies of Archean (>2500 Ma) sedimentary rocks indicates that life existed 3500 Ma, but the question of when oxygenic photosynthesis evolved is still unanswered. A clear paleontological window on cyanobacterial evolution opened about 2000 Ma, revealing an already-diverse biota of cyanobacteria. Cyanobacteria remained the principal primary producers of oxygen throughout the Proterozoic Eon (2500–543 Ma), in part because the redox structure of the oceans favored photoautotrophs capable of nitrogen fixation. Green algae joined cyanobacteria as the major primary producers of oxygen on continental shelves near the end of the Proterozoic, but only with the Mesozoic (251–66 Ma) radiations of dinoflagellates, coccolithophorids, and diatoms did the primary production of oxygen in marine shelf waters take modern form. Cyanobacteria remain critical to marine ecosystems as primary producers of oxygen in oceanic gyres, as agents of biological nitrogen fixation, and, in modified form, as the plastids of marine algae.
== Experimental history ==
=== Discovery ===
Although some of the steps in photosynthesis are still not completely understood, the overall photosynthetic equation has been known since the 19th century.
Jan van Helmont began the research of the process in the mid-17th century when he carefully measured the mass of the soil a plant was using and the mass of the plant as it grew. After noticing that the soil mass changed very little, he hypothesized that the mass of the growing plant must come from the water, the only substance he added to the potted plant. His hypothesis was partially accurate – much of the gained mass comes from carbon dioxide as well as water. However, this was a signaling point to the idea that the bulk of a plant's biomass comes from the inputs of photosynthesis, not the soil itself.
Joseph Priestley, a chemist and minister, discovered that when he isolated a volume of air under an inverted jar and burned a candle in it (which gave off CO2), the candle would burn out very quickly, much before it ran out of wax. He further discovered that a mouse could similarly "injure" air. He then showed that a plant could restore the air the candle and the mouse had "injured".
In 1779, Jan Ingenhousz repeated Priestley's experiments. He discovered that it was the influence of sunlight on the plant that could cause it to revive a mouse in a matter of hours.
In 1796, Jean Senebier, a Swiss pastor, botanist, and naturalist, demonstrated that green plants consume carbon dioxide and release oxygen under the influence of light. Soon afterward, Nicolas-Théodore de Saussure showed that the increase in mass of the plant as it grows could not be due only to uptake of CO2 but also to the incorporation of water. Thus, the basic reaction by which organisms use photosynthesis to produce food (such as glucose) was outlined.
=== Refinements ===
Cornelis Van Niel made key discoveries explaining the chemistry of photosynthesis. By studying purple sulfur bacteria and green bacteria, he was the first to demonstrate that photosynthesis is a light-dependent redox reaction in which hydrogen reduces (donates its atoms as electrons and protons to) carbon dioxide.
Robert Emerson discovered two light reactions by testing plant productivity using different wavelengths of light. With the red alone, the light reactions were suppressed. When blue and red were combined, the output was much more substantial. Thus, there were two photosystems, one absorbing up to 600 nm wavelengths, the other up to 700 nm. The former is known as PSII, the latter is PSI. PSI contains only chlorophyll "a", PSII contains primarily chlorophyll "a" with most of the available chlorophyll "b", among other pigments. These include phycobilins, which are the red and blue pigments of red and blue algae, respectively, and fucoxanthol for brown algae and diatoms. The process is most productive when the absorption of quanta is equal in both PSII and PSI, assuring that input energy from the antenna complex is divided between the PSI and PSII systems, which in turn powers the photochemistry.
Robert Hill thought that a complex of reactions consisted of an intermediate to cytochrome b6 (now a plastoquinone), and that another was from cytochrome f to a step in the carbohydrate-generating mechanisms. These are linked by plastoquinone, which does require energy to reduce cytochrome f. Further experiments to prove that the oxygen developed during the photosynthesis of green plants came from water were performed by Hill in 1937 and 1939. He showed that isolated chloroplasts give off oxygen in the presence of unnatural reducing agents like iron oxalate, ferricyanide or benzoquinone after exposure to light. In the Hill reaction:
2 H2O + 2 A + (light, chloroplasts) → 2 AH2 + O2
A is the electron acceptor. Therefore, in light, the electron acceptor is reduced and oxygen is evolved. Samuel Ruben and Martin Kamen used radioactive isotopes to determine that the oxygen liberated in photosynthesis came from the water.
Melvin Calvin and Andrew Benson, along with James Bassham, elucidated the path of carbon assimilation (the photosynthetic carbon reduction cycle) in plants. The carbon reduction cycle is known as the Calvin cycle, but many scientists refer to it as the Calvin-Benson, Benson-Calvin, or even Calvin-Benson-Bassham (or CBB) Cycle.
Nobel Prize–winning scientist Rudolph A. Marcus was later able to discover the function and significance of the electron transport chain.
Otto Heinrich Warburg and Dean Burk discovered the I-quantum photosynthesis reaction that splits CO2, activated by the respiration.
In 1950, first experimental evidence for the existence of photophosphorylation in vivo was presented by Otto Kandler using intact Chlorella cells and interpreting his findings as light-dependent ATP formation.
In 1954, Daniel I. Arnon et al. discovered photophosphorylation in vitro in isolated chloroplasts with the help of P32.
Louis N. M. Duysens and Jan Amesz discovered that chlorophyll "a" will absorb one light, oxidize cytochrome f, while chlorophyll "a" (and other pigments) will absorb another light but will reduce this same oxidized cytochrome, stating the two light reactions are in series.
=== Development of the concept ===
In 1893, the American botanist Charles Reid Barnes proposed two terms, photosyntax and photosynthesis, for the biological process of synthesis of complex carbon compounds out of carbonic acid, in the presence of chlorophyll, under the influence of light. The term photosynthesis is derived from the Greek phōs (φῶς, 'gleam') and sýnthesis (σύνθεσις, 'arranging together'), while photosyntax comes from sýntaxis (σύνταξις, 'configuration'). Over time, the term photosynthesis came into common usage. Later discovery of anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria and photophosphorylation necessitated redefinition of the term.
=== C3 : C4 photosynthesis research ===
In the late 1940s at the University of California, Berkeley, the details of photosynthetic carbon metabolism were sorted out by the chemists Melvin Calvin, Andrew Benson, James Bassham and a score of students and researchers utilizing the carbon-14 isotope and paper chromatography techniques. The pathway of CO2 fixation by the algae Chlorella in a fraction of a second in light resulted in a three carbon molecule called phosphoglyceric acid (PGA). For that original and ground-breaking work, a Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to Melvin Calvin in 1961. In parallel, plant physiologists studied leaf gas exchanges using the new method of infrared gas analysis and a leaf chamber where the net photosynthetic rates ranged from 10 to 13 μmol CO2·m−2·s−1, with the conclusion that all terrestrial plants have the same photosynthetic capacities, that are light saturated at less than 50% of sunlight.
Later in 1958–1963 at Cornell University, field grown maize was reported to have much greater leaf photosynthetic rates of 40 μmol CO2·m−2·s−1 and not be saturated at near full sunlight. This higher rate in maize was almost double of those observed in other species such as wheat and soybean, indicating that large differences in photosynthesis exist among higher plants. At the University of Arizona, detailed gas exchange research on more than 15 species of monocots and dicots uncovered for the first time that differences in leaf anatomy are crucial factors in differentiating photosynthetic capacities among species. In tropical grasses, including maize, sorghum, sugarcane, Bermuda grass and in the dicot amaranthus, leaf photosynthetic rates were around 38−40 μmol CO2·m−2·s−1, and the leaves have two types of green cells, i.e. outer layer of mesophyll cells surrounding a tightly packed cholorophyllous vascular bundle sheath cells. This type of anatomy was termed Kranz anatomy in the 19th century by the botanist Gottlieb Haberlandt while studying leaf anatomy of sugarcane. Plant species with the greatest photosynthetic rates and Kranz anatomy showed no apparent photorespiration, very low CO2 compensation point, high optimum temperature, high stomatal resistances and lower mesophyll resistances for gas diffusion and rates never saturated at full sun light. The research at Arizona was designated a Citation Classic in 1986. These species were later termed C4 plants as the first stable compound of CO2 fixation in light has four carbons as malate and aspartate. Other species that lack Kranz anatomy were termed C3 type such as cotton and sunflower, as the first stable carbon compound is the three-carbon PGA. At 1000 ppm CO2 in measuring air, both the C3 and C4 plants had similar leaf photosynthetic rates around 60 μmol CO2·m−2·s−1 indicating the suppression of photorespiration in C3 plants.
== Factors ==
There are four main factors influencing photosynthesis and several corollary factors. The four main are:
Light irradiance and wavelength
Water absorption
Carbon dioxide concentration
Temperature.
Total photosynthesis is limited by a range of environmental factors. These include the amount of light available, the amount of leaf area a plant has to capture light (shading by other plants is a major limitation of photosynthesis), the rate at which carbon dioxide can be supplied to the chloroplasts to support photosynthesis, the availability of water, and the availability of suitable temperatures for carrying out photosynthesis.
=== Light intensity (irradiance), wavelength and temperature ===
The process of photosynthesis provides the main input of free energy into the biosphere, and is one of four main ways in which radiation is important for plant life.
The radiation climate within plant communities is extremely variable, in both time and space.
In the early 20th century, Frederick Blackman and Gabrielle Matthaei investigated the effects of light intensity (irradiance) and temperature on the rate of carbon assimilation.
At constant temperature, the rate of carbon assimilation varies with irradiance, increasing as the irradiance increases, but reaching a plateau at higher irradiance.
At low irradiance, increasing the temperature has little influence on the rate of carbon assimilation. At constant high irradiance, the rate of carbon assimilation increases as the temperature is increased.
These two experiments illustrate several important points: First, it is known that, in general, photochemical reactions are not affected by temperature. However, these experiments clearly show that temperature affects the rate of carbon assimilation, so there must be two sets of reactions in the full process of carbon assimilation. These are the light-dependent 'photochemical' temperature-independent stage, and the light-independent, temperature-dependent stage. Second, Blackman's experiments illustrate the concept of limiting factors. Another limiting factor is the wavelength of light. Cyanobacteria, which reside several meters underwater, cannot receive the correct wavelengths required to cause photoinduced charge separation in conventional photosynthetic pigments. To combat this problem, Cyanobacteria have a light-harvesting complex called Phycobilisome. This complex is made up of a series of proteins with different pigments which surround the reaction center.
=== Carbon dioxide levels and photorespiration ===
As carbon dioxide concentrations rise, the rate at which sugars are made by the light-independent reactions increases until limited by other factors. RuBisCO, the enzyme that captures carbon dioxide in the light-independent reactions, has a binding affinity for both carbon dioxide and oxygen. When the concentration of carbon dioxide is high, RuBisCO will fix carbon dioxide. However, if the carbon dioxide concentration is low, RuBisCO will bind oxygen instead of carbon dioxide. This process, called photorespiration, uses energy, but does not produce sugars.
RuBisCO oxygenase activity is disadvantageous to plants for several reasons:
One product of oxygenase activity is phosphoglycolate (2 carbon) instead of 3-phosphoglycerate (3 carbon). Phosphoglycolate cannot be metabolized by the Calvin-Benson cycle and represents carbon lost from the cycle. A high oxygenase activity, therefore, drains the sugars that are required to recycle ribulose 5-bisphosphate and for the continuation of the Calvin-Benson cycle.
Phosphoglycolate is quickly metabolized to glycolate that is toxic to a plant at a high concentration; it inhibits photosynthesis.
Salvaging glycolate is an energetically expensive process that uses the glycolate pathway, and only 75% of the carbon is returned to the Calvin-Benson cycle as 3-phosphoglycerate. The reactions also produce ammonia (NH3), which is able to diffuse out of the plant, leading to a loss of nitrogen.
A highly simplified summary is:
2 glycolate + ATP → 3-phosphoglycerate + carbon dioxide + ADP + NH3
The salvaging pathway for the products of RuBisCO oxygenase activity is more commonly known as photorespiration, since it is characterized by light-dependent oxygen consumption and the release of carbon dioxide.
== See also ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
=== Books ===
=== Papers ===
== External links ==
A collection of photosynthesis pages for all levels from a renowned expert (Govindjee)
In depth, advanced treatment of photosynthesis, also from Govindjee
Science Aid: Photosynthesis Article appropriate for high school science
Metabolism, Cellular Respiration and Photosynthesis – The Virtual Library of Biochemistry and Cell Biology
Overall examination of Photosynthesis at an intermediate level
Overall Energetics of Photosynthesis
The source of oxygen produced by photosynthesis Interactive animation, a textbook tutorial